--- PAGE 105 ---
MINERALS
Introduction
Definition
The term “mineral” is generally used to denote all inorganic ele-
ments in a food. These inorganic elements constitute the
majority of ash that remains after combustion of all organic
matter. Ash analysis is of little value either for expressing min-
eral requirements or for indicating the useful mineral content of
foods for two basic reasons: 1) body requirements are specific
for certain inorganic elements (e.g., calcium, zinc, etc.) and 2)
ash may not be a measure of total inorganic matter present,
because some organic carbon may be bound as carbonate, and
some inorganic elements (e.g., sulfur, selenium, iodine, fluorine
and even sodium) may be lost during combustion.
The most important reason to determine total ash is to calcu-
late the nitrogen-free extract by difference, as is required in the
proximate analysis of foodstuffs.Specific minerals of interest can
then be assayed (if not volatilized) from the ash component.
More than 18 mineral elements are believed to be essential
for mammals (McDowell, 1992). By definition, macrominerals
are required by the animal in the diet in percentage amounts,
whereas microminerals or “trace” minerals are required at the
mg/kg or parts per million (ppm). There are seven macromin-
erals: calcium, phosphorus, sodium, magnesium, potassium,
chloride and sulfur. There are at least 11 trace elements or
micronutrient minerals: iron, zinc, copper, iodine, selenium,
manganese, cobalt, molybdenum, fluorine, boron and chromi-
um.The last six are assumed to be essential for dogs and cats by
analogy with other species. Calcium, phosphorus, magnesium,
potassium, sodium and chloride are discussed below. Neither
the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)
nor the National Research Council (NRC) lists a sulfur
requirement for dogs or cats (AAFCO, 2007; NRC, 2006).
Generally, there isn’t a dietary need for sulfur per se, if a food is
formulated to meet the sulfur-containing amino acid require-
ments of animals with simple stomachs.
Of the microminerals, only iron, zinc, copper, manganese,
iodine and selenium will be discussed here. These trace miner-
als have been deemed essential for dogs and cats (although clin-
ical cases of manganese deficiency have never been reported to
occur in dogs or cats) (AAFCO, 2007). Cobalt and molybde-
num are clearly important minerals in ruminant nutrition, but
are not considered essential in monogastric species.
Information about chromium and boron, two ultra-trace min-
erals, is included because of the potential importance these
nutrients may have in companion animal nutrition. Other new
trace elements discovered since 1970 include arsenic, lead, lithi-
um, nickel, silicon, tin and vanadium. The essentiality of these
minerals has not been elucidated in all species and under prac-
tical conditions may not be essential in the diet.
Function
Minerals are fundamental as: 1) structural components of body
organs and tissues, such as calcium, phosphorus and magne-
Chapter
6
Micronutrients:
Minerals and Vitamins
相关研究者 
Shiguang Yu 
Lauren Kats
Inke Paetau-Robinson
Christopher S. Cowell
“Maybe my variety is due to bad absorption of vitamins.”
Stephen Hawking
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 106 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
108
Table 6-1. Mineral functions and effects of deficiencies and excesses.
Mineral
Function
Deficiency
Excess
Calcium
Constituent of bone and teeth, 
Decreased growth, decreased 
Decreased feed efficiency and feed intake,
blood clotting, muscle function, nerve 
appetite, decreased bone 
nephrosis, lameness, enlarged costochondral 
transmission, membrane permeability
mineralization, lameness, 
junctions. Increased calcium intake is a risk 
spontaneous fractures, loose teeth, 
factor for calcium-containing urinary 
tetany, convulsions, rickets 
precipitates; however, moderate- to high-
(osteomalacia in adults)
calcium levels may be protective against 
calcium oxalate precipitates. Calcium in 
meals may bind with oxalate in the gut 
decreasing the risk.
Phosphorus
Constituent of bone and teeth, 
Depraved appetite, pica,
Bone loss, uroliths, decreased weight gain,  
muscle formation, fat, carbohydrate 
decreased feed efficiency, 
decreased feed intake, calcification of soft 
and protein metabolism, phospholipids 
decreased growth, dull coat, 
tissues, secondary hyperparathyroidism
and energy production, reproduction
decreased fertility, spontaneous 
fractures, rickets
Potassium
Muscle contraction, transmission of
Anorexia, decreased growth,  
Rare. Paresis, bradycardia
nerve impulses, acid-base balance, 
lethargy, locomotive problems, 
osmotic balance, enzyme cofactor 
hypokalemia, heart and kidney 
(energy transfer)
lesions, emaciation
Sodium and 
Osmotic pressure, acid-base balance, 
Inability to maintain water balance, 
Occurs only if there is inadequate good-
chloride
transmission of nerve impulses, 
decreased growth, anorexia, 
quality water available. Thirst, pruritus, 
nutrient uptake, waste excretion, 
fatigue, exhaustion, hair loss
constipation, seizures and death
water metabolism
Magnesium
Component of bone and intracellular 
Muscle weakness, hyperirritability, 
Uroliths, flaccid paralysis
fluids, neuromuscular transmission, 
convulsions, anorexia, vomiting, 
active component of several enzymes,
decreased mineralization of bone,  
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism
decreased body weight, 
calcification of aorta
Iron
Enzyme constituent, activation of 
Anemia, rough coat, listlessness, 
Anorexia, weight loss, decreased serum 
O2 (oxidases and oxygenases), 
decreased growth
albumin concentrations, hepatic dysfunction, 
oxygen transport (hemoglobin, 
hemosiderosis
myoglobin)
Zinc
Constituent or activator of 200 known
Anorexia, decreased growth,   
Relatively nontoxic. Reported cases of zinc
enzymes (nucleic acid metabolism, 
alopecia, parakeratosis, impaired 
toxicity from consumption of die-cast zinc 
protein synthesis, carbohydrate 
reproduction, vomiting, hair 
nuts or pennies
metabolism), skin and wound healing, 
depigmentation, conjunctivitis
immune response, fetal development, 
growth rate
Copper
Component of several enzymes 
Anemia, decreased growth, hair 
Hepatitis, increased liver enzyme activity
(oxidases), catalyst in hemoglobin 
depigmentation, bone lesions, 
formation, cardiac function, cellular 
neuromuscular disorders, 
respiration, connective tissue 
reproductive failure
development, pigmentation, bone 
formation, myelin formation, immune 
function
Manganese
Component and activator of enzymes 
Impaired reproduction, fatty liver, 
Relatively nontoxic
(glycosyl transferases), lipid and 
crooked legs, decreased growth
carbohydrate metabolism, bone 
development (organic matrix), 
reproduction, cell membrane 
integrity (mitochondria)
Selenium
Constituent of glutathione peroxidase 
Muscular dystrophy, reproductive 
Vomiting, spasms, staggered gait, salivation, 
and iodothyronine 5’-deiodinase, 
failure, decreased feed intake, 
decreased appetite, dyspnea, oral malodor, 
immune function, reproduction
subcutaneous edema, renal
nail loss 
mineralization
Iodine
Constituent of thyroxine and 
Goiter, fetal resorption, rough coat, 
Similar to those caused by deficiency.
triiodothyronine
enlarged thyroid glands, alopecia, 
Decreased appetite, listlessness, rough coat, 
apathy, myxedema, lethargy
decreased immunity, decreased weight gain, 
goiter, fever
Boron
Regulates parathyroid hormone, 
Decreased growth, decreased 
Similar to those caused by deficiency
influences metabolism of calcium, 
hematocrit, hemoglobin and 
phosphorus, magnesium and 
alkaline phosphatase values
cholecalciferol
Chromium
Potentiates insulin action, therefore 
Impaired glucose tolerance, 
Trivalent form less toxic than hexavalent.
improves glucose tolerance
increased serum triglyceride and 
Dermatitis, respiratory irritation, lung cancer
cholesterol concentrations
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 107 ---
sium in bones and teeth, 2) constituents of body fluids and tis-
sues such as electrolytes concerned with the maintenance of
osmotic pressure, acid-base balance, muscle contraction,
membrane permeability and tissue irritability (e.g., sodium,
potassium, chloride, calcium and magnesium in blood, cere-
brospinal fluid and gastric juice) and 3) catalysts/cofactors in
enzyme and hormone systems, as integral and specific com-
ponents of the structure of metalloenzymes, or as less specific
activators within those systems. Table 6-1 lists specific func-
tions of each mineral.
Homeostasis
Specific concentrations and functional forms of minerals must
be maintained within certain limits for optimal growth, health
and fertility. Higher organisms possess homeostatic mecha-
nisms that attempt to maintain concentrations of minerals at
their active sites within narrow physiologic limits despite over-
or under-ingestion. Such mechanisms include control of intes-
tinal absorption or excretion, the availability of specific stores
for individual elements and the use of “chemical sinks” such as
metallothionein that can bind potentially toxic amounts of ele-
ments in an innocuous form (Underwood and Mertz, 1987).
The degree of homeostatic control varies from one element
to another. Continued ingestion of diets or exposure to envi-
ronments that are severely deficient, imbalanced or excessively
high in a particular trace element, or in an interfering substance
such as phytate or certain fibers, can induce changes in func-
tioning forms, activities or concentrations of that element in
body tissues and fluids so that they fall below or rise above the
desired limits. Altered metabolism develops in these circum-
stances, which may affect physiologic function. Structural dis-
orders may also arise in ways that differ with various elements,
with the degree and duration of the dietary deficiency or toxic-
ity and with the age, gender and species of the animal involved.
Deficiency/Adequacy/Toxicity
Traditionally, minerals were classified as “essential” or “toxic,”
but as more information was gathered, elements shifted from
the latter to the former category (e.g., selenium). However, tox-
icity may occur with all elements. A “biologic dose-response
curve” exists for each element (Underwood and Mertz, 1987).
This curve (Figure 5-2) identifies a range of concentrations
that spans three primary areas: 1) at low concentrations, physi-
ologic function is consistently and reproducibly impaired
(defined as deficiency), 2) at optimal concentrations, the nutri-
ent is provided at levels necessary to meet the requirements of
the animal and 3) at excessive concentrations, pharmaco-toxi-
cologic effects occur. The intakes or dose levels at which these
phases become evident and the width of the optimal plateau
vary widely among minerals and can be markedly affected by
the extent to which various other elements and compounds are
present in the animal’s body and in the food consumed (Box 6-
1).Table 6-1 lists specific signs of mineral deficiencies and tox-
icities.
Several nutrients have specific therapeutic uses at high
dosages (e.g., zinc is fed at growth-promoting levels in swine to
prevent diarrhea). However, high doses may result in detrimen-
tal side effects after prolonged use. The pharmacologic actions
of nutrients differ in several ways from their physiologic func-
tions: 1) doses greatly exceeding the amount of a nutrient pres-
ent in foods are usually needed to obtain a therapeutic response,
2) the specificity of the pharmacologic action is often different
from the physiologic function and 3) chemical analogues of the
nutrient that are often most effective pharmacologically may
have little or no nutritional activity (RDA, 1989) (Box 5-7).
Claims of nutritional adequacy of pet foods are based on the
current AAFCO nutrient allowances (“profiles”). These levels
are neither minimal requirements nor necessarily optimal
intake levels. It isn’t possible to establish optimal levels without
additional information about nutrient requirements for all
lifestages and information concerning the availability of nutri-
ents from pet food ingredients and complete diets. In some
cases, insufficient margins of safety have been given to account
for population variation, product diversity, processing effects
and potentially low nutrient availabilities of certain pet food
ingredients. In the case of trace minerals, the ratio between
dietary allowance and absolute requirement can be as large as
100:1 (e.g., chromium) because of incomplete absorption, or
can approach unity (e.g., iodine) when absorption is high
(Underwood and Mertz,1987).The nature of typical diets con-
sumed strongly influences dietary allowances because numer-
ous interactions among dietary components and different
109
Minerals and Vitamins
Figure 6-1. Mineral interrelationships. Minerals connected by a line
clinically or experimentally interact with the other mineral. This inter-
action may be bidirectional (each mineral affects the use of the other)
or unidirectional (one mineral affects the use of the second mineral
but not vice versa). (Adapted from Puls R. Mineral Levels in Animal
Health. Clearbrook, British Columbia: Diagnostic Data Sherpa
International, 1990; 19.)
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 108 ---
chemical forms in individual foods determine biologic avail-
ability. Thus, it is important to understand the limitations of
AAFCO nutrient profiles.
Mineral Interactions
A tremendous number of mineral-mineral interactions exist
(Figure 6-1). In general, these interactions can be antagonistic
(the presence of one mineral reduces the transport or biologic
efficacy of the other) or synergistic (the two minerals act in a
complementary fashion either by sparing or substituting for the
other mineral or the two together enhance a biologic function).
Most mineral interactions are antagonistic and can occur via a
number of different mechanisms that include interactions
(Solomons, 1988): 1) in the food during processing, before con-
sumption, 2) in the digestive tract, where there is competition
for uptake sites or intracellular-level mechanisms, 3) at the tis-
sue level, either at storage sites or inhibition of enzyme activity,
4) at the time of transport and 5) in the excretory pathway.
The rigors of processing can affect the availability of min-
erals either positively or negatively via changes in solubility,
pH, reduction potential and charge density and creation of
complexes (Clydesdale, 1988). Charge density refers to the
valence state and size of a metal. For example, the cations in
the periodic table in groups 6B to 2B, with a relatively high
ionic charge (+2, +3) and small size, form a large number of
stable complex ions, whereas the large alkali metal cations,
such as Na+ and K+, with a small charge are much less likely
to form complexes with proteins or carbohydrate moieties via
ionic, coordinate or covalent bonds. Furthermore, among the
transition metals, which may form more than one cation,
complexes formed by the +3 valence state (e.g., Cr+3, Co+3)
are more numerous and more stable than complexes formed
by their respective +2 ions. Charge is also involved with cell
permeability and ion solubility before ions enter cells.
Solubility varies tremendously depending on ion size and
degree of polarity or charge.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
110
The requirements for most nutrients are derived from experimen-
tal and clinical evidence of deficiency and the amount of nutrient
needed to prevent signs of deficiency. When balance studies are
used to estimate requirements, the requirement is defined as the
intake at which zero balance is attained, or when intake is equal to
excretion in urine and feces. However, the zero balance point will
underestimate the requirement, if the measurement does not
account for endogenous losses and losses in sweat.
Mineral balance studies have been criticized as inadequate and
erroneous measures of body requirements. Small percentage
errors in determining intakes and excretion can result in significant
differences in balance calculations. One of the biggest problems in
conducting balance studies is separating feces into time intervals
that can be related to intake. Fecal markers aid in separation, but
peristaltic reflux may still confound results. In addition, one ani-
mal’s rate of passage can vary markedly. Adaptation to a different
intake level may occur in a few days or weeks. Some adaptations,
however, take several months or even years to occur. Thus, the
adaptation period and collection period need to be sufficiently long
to take into account animal adjustments to new foods, rates of
passage and homeostatic adaptation.
Balance studies are probably more reliable when the mineral is
excreted in the urine, rather than in the feces. This finding is true
for sodium, potassium and selenium. When absorption of a nutri-
ent is low, as is the case for a number of minerals, the amount of
fecal mineral is large compared with the amount absorbed (e.g.,
the mineral concentration in feces is attributed to unabsorbed min-
eral and endogenous secretion). Failure to measure endogenous
secretion may markedly underestimate the true amount of
absorbed mineral. However, if radioisotopes or stable isotopes are
used in conjunction with a balance study, the endogenous secre-
tions can be distinguished from unabsorbed mineral and a meas-
ure of true absorption attained (as opposed to “apparent” absorp-
tion, which does not account for endogenous losses). Balance
studies without the use of isotopes are fraught with inaccuracy and
variability. Few analytical methods give a coefficient of variation as
good as 5%, especially in complex matrices such as food, urine
and feces.Thus, balance studies will not detect nutritionally impor-
tant mineral differences when absorption efficiencies are low and
radioisotopes or stable isotopes are not used.
Probably the biggest criticism of balance studies is that balance
studies better reflect habitual intake than a requirement or zero
balance. For example, an intake of 1 µg of selenium/kg body
weight maintains a zero balance in Americans. Approximately one-
tenth of that intake maintains a balance in people living in China;
China is an area in which the risk of selenium deficiency is high
and prevalence of Keshan disease is significant. Thus, zero bal-
ance does not necessarily indicate absence of disease. In New
Zealand, selenium balance is maintained on an intake of one-third
the amount required by Americans.
Analogous situations also exist worldwide for calcium balance.
Widely different intakes of calcium result in zero balances in differ-
ent countries. Thus, the previous dietary intake exerts a significant
effect on the nutrient level that results in a zero balance and is
more a reflection of the intake required to maintain an existing
mineral pool size.
Balance studies should be evaluated with caution when
attempting to determine requirements. A summary of their limita-
tions follows:
• Prior long-term habitual intake influences whether positive,
negative or equilibrium balance occurs at a particular intake.
• The duration of the study may not be long enough to allow for
homeostatic adaptation.
• Cumulative errors occur from environmental contamination,
individual variability and analytical methods. Thus, balance
studies that demonstrate no treatment differences, may in
fact be a result of the insensitivity and imprecision of the bal-
ance method.
The Bibliography for Box 6-1 can be found at
www.markmorris.org
Box 6-1. Mineral Balance Studies.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 109 ---
Solubility is of obvious importance; a mineral must come in
contact with the intestinal mucosa if it is to be absorbed.
Charge density is less obvious but important for its effect on
complex formation and membrane permeability. Solubility as it
refers to mineral availability includes the solubility of an ion,
salt, hydrate or complex, and to the type and strength of chem-
ical bonds within these molecules. Inhibition of mineral
absorption by a food can be overcome by the use of mineral
enhancers, such as ascorbate, meat, citric acid and other ligands
(e.g., ascorbate enhances iron absorption but negatively affects
copper uptake; both effects are brought about by a change in
pH and reduction in valence state).
Mineral-mineral interactions that occur in the digestive tract
result from chemically similar minerals sharing “channels” for
absorption. In this situation, simultaneous ingestion of two or
more such minerals will result in competition for absorption
(Solomons, 1988). In other words, when the dietary supply of
a nutrient and/or the body reserves of a mineral are low, the
intestine adapts to improve the efficiency of uptake and trans-
fer. When the adaptation is nonspecific, other similar minerals
have enhanced absorption. In iron deficiency, an up-regulation
of iron also increases uptake of lead (Solomons, 1988). Other
examples of interactions occurring in the digestive tract include
the formation of insoluble mineral complexes (e.g., foods con-
taining phytate and excessive calcium will form an insoluble
calcium/phytate/zinc complex that reduces zinc availability).
Mineral-mineral interactions can also occur at the tissue
storage level. High levels of dietary iron, for example, reduce
hepatic copper stores. In studies, when ratios of iron to copper
exceeded 20:1, hepatic copper levels were reduced to less than
50% of control values (Solomons, 1988). Likewise, trace min-
erals such as zinc can be mobilized when calcium is deficient
because co-mobilization of both minerals takes place from the
skeleton, making both available for use.
Mineral-mineral interactions can also occur at the time of
transport. Transferrin is a serum transport protein for iron.
Transferrin is generally less than 50% saturated with iron in its
transit from site to site (Solomons, 1988). Transferrin can also
transport chromium and manganese; therefore, these minerals
may compete for binding sites contained in transferrin.
Finally, mineral-mineral interactions can also occur within
pathways of excretion. For example, levels of circulating ionized
calcium govern the release of parathyroid hormone (PTH)
from the parathyroid gland. PTH status, in turn, influences
renal tubular handling of filtered phosphate. Evidence also
points to an interaction between calcium and magnesium at the
level of renal excretion (Solomons, 1988).
Availability
Evaluation of feeds as sources of minerals depends not only on
what the feed contains (i.e., the analyzed nutrient content), but
also on how much of the mineral can be used by the animal.
The adequacy of a food, as determined by its analytical miner-
al concentration, can be misleading because a number of factors
can influence mineral availability. These include: 1) the chemi-
cal form (which influences solubility), 2) the amounts and pro-
portions of other dietary components with which it interacts
metabolically, 3) the age, gender and species of the animal, 4)
intake of the mineral and the need (body stores) and 5) envi-
ronmental factors (Underwood and Mertz, 1987) (Box 6-2).
Few studies have been completed in dogs and cats to evalu-
ate the availability of minerals in foodstuffs used in commercial
pet foods. Thus, there are many unknowns about the availabil-
ity of nutrients in pet foods and whether a given food is truly
adequate for a given lifestage.The availability of different forms
of a mineral can vary widely even among inorganic mineral
supplements. In general, different forms of trace minerals (iron,
zinc, manganese and copper) differ in availability as follows:
sulfate and chloride forms >carbonates >oxides (Aoyagi and
Baker, 1993; Wedekind and Baker, 1990; McDowell, 1992a;
Henry et al, 1986). The oxides of iron and copper are poorly
available and should not be used as mineral supplements in pet
food (McDowell, 1992a; Morris and Rogers, 1994).
In general, meat-derived foodstuffs are considered a more
available source of certain minerals than plant-derived food-
stuffs. The organic forms of minerals found in meats are often
more available or as available as those from inorganic mineral
supplements, whereas the minerals in plants are often less avail-
able (Aoyagi et al, 1993; Hortin et al, 1993). This finding
applies more for iron, zinc and copper than for selenium.
Although the mechanism has not been fully delineated, one
theory has been suggested to explain why organic forms of
minerals are better used than inorganic forms.This theory pos-
tulates that chelates or complexes provide the mineral in a pro-
tected form (Kratzer and Vohra, 1986), analogous to the iron
contained in heme, wherein the iron is complexed to a proto-
porphyrin ring. Because the metal is complexed or bound, it is
protected from being sequestered by other dietary components
(e.g.,phytate,fiber and sugars) and is less likely to compete with
mineral excesses.
Regardless of whether the molecular species is plant- or
animal-derived, the complex must be able to be absorbed by
mucosal cells or be cleaved to release the mineral in a soluble
form or have stability constants that allow the mineral to be
transferred to mucosal or serosal acceptors for availability
(Clydesdale, 1988). Other explanations for why animal prod-
ucts are generally more available forms of certain minerals
than plants include the “meat-factor” effect, wherein meat
provides an available form of the mineral and enhances the
absorption of the mineral supplied by the rest of the food
(Kapsokefalou and Miller, 1993; Turnlund et al, 1983). In
addition, meats, unlike plants, do not contain anti-nutritional
factors, such as phytate, oxalate, goitrogens and fiber, which
reduce mineral availability.
Not all fiber sources, however, negatively affect mineral avail-
ability. Research in chicks (Wedekind et al, 1995, 1996) and
puppies (Wedekind et al, 1996a) indicated marked differences
about how fiber sources affect mineral availability (Table 5-7).
In these studies, beet pulp consistently reduced the availability
of minerals (zinc, calcium, phosphorus and iron); however, cel-
lulose, corn bran and sunflower hulls had negligible effects. Pea
fiber, peanut hulls and soy hulls inhibited availability of some
111
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 110 ---
but not all of the minerals evaluated. Additional mineral sup-
plementation is warranted for foods known to have reduced
mineral availability.
Macrominerals
Calcium
Calcium serves two important functions: 1) as a structural com-
ponent in bones and teeth and 2) as an intracellular second
messenger that enables cells to respond to stimuli such as hor-
mones and neurotransmitters. Calcium’s two major physiologic
functions in bone are to serve as a structural material and as an
ion reservoir. When calcium in bone acts as an ion reservoir, it
is in equilibrium with serum ionized calcium and under tight
homeostatic control.
The mechanism of calcium homeostasis in blood is complex
and involves several organs. Blood concentrations of ionized (or
free) calcium are the major initiator of calcium regulatory
mechanisms in the body. Calcium in blood is in equilibrium
between a free or ionized state (~50%), a protein-bound state
(~40 to 45%) and a complexed or chelated state (~5 to 10%).
The effects of changing ionized calcium concentration in blood
are highlighted below (Figure 6-2) (Nap and Hazewinkel,
1994). Low concentrations of ionized calcium:
• Stimulate PTH secretion, which stimulates conversion of
25-hydroxycholecalciferol (25-OH-D3) to the biologically
more potent 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25-(OH)2-
D3) in the kidneys
• 1,25-(OH)2-D3 stimulates calcium uptake in the gut via
receptor-mediated mechanisms
• 1,25-(OH)2-D3, in conjunction with PTH, stimulates
bone resorption
• PTH induces phosphaturia.
High or normal concentrations of ionized calcium:
• Stimulate calcitonin secretion, which does not stimulate
1,25-(OH)2-D3 production
• 24,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (24,25-(OH)2-D3) is now
produced in the kidneys, which is considered biologically
less active
• No stimulation of gut absorption or bone resorption occurs
• Increased renal calcium excretion results
• Calcitonin decreases osteoclastic activity.
PTH, calcitonin and 1,25-(OH)2-D3 act together to main-
tain calcium homeostasis in the face of variable dietary intakes
and changing calcium requirements during growth, pregnancy
and lactation.
The amount of true calcium absorption may range from 25
to 90%, depending upon calcium status, calcium form or
intake (Nap and Hazewinkel, 1994). This exchangeable pool
consists of the small amount of calcium in blood, lymph and
other body fluids, and accounts for 1% of the total body cal-
cium. The remaining 99% is located in bones and teeth.
There are three routes of calcium absorption in the intestine.
One is an active, saturable, transcellular process that occurs
primarily in the duodenum and proximal jejunum. The
process is regulated by vitamin D and involves a vitamin D-
dependent, calcium-binding protein (CaBP or cal-bindin).
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
112
Box 6-2. Organic vs. Inorganic Minerals.
There is some debate about whether organic forms of trace min-
erals are more available than inorganic forms. The answer
depends on the specific mineral, the dietary conditions and the
physiologic state of the animal. Clearly, the organic forms of cer-
tain minerals (e.g., selenium, chromium, iron) are better used
than inorganic forms. (See the selenium, chromium and iron
sections of this chapter.) Which form is better used is less clear
for other minerals (e.g., zinc, copper). For example, there are as
many studies that have failed to show increased availability with
zinc/copper organic forms as there are studies demonstrating
improved availability.
A number of factors influence the outcome of availability stud-
ies, including: 1) the presence of non-nutritional factors (e.g.,
phytate, fiber, goitrogens), 2) nutrient interactions (e.g., excess-
es of other minerals) and 3) physiologic state (e.g., demand for
certain minerals increases with reproduction and growth com-
pared to that of maintenance, thus in these situations, the differ-
ences in availability are magnified between organic and inorgan-
ic sources).
Results of studies in puppies showed that as calcium levels
increased from 1.0 to 1.5%, zinc usage (as measured by
changes in plasma zinc concentrations) decreased, irrespective
of whether the source was organic (zinc propionate) or inorgan-
ic (zinc oxide). Zinc from zinc propionate was approximately 1.8
to 2 times more available than from zinc oxide.
Other investigators likewise noted increased zinc retention (as
measured by zinc deposition in hair and fecal zinc excretion) for
adult dogs fed a zinc-amino acid chelate compared with the
same dogs fed zinc polysaccharide or zinc oxide. Increasing cal-
cium from 1.2 to 3.2% reduced zinc retention when dogs were
fed zinc polysaccharide or zinc oxide, but not the zinc-amino
acid chelate.
Similarly, researchers have demonstrated in livestock and fish
that growth rate and calcium and phytate levels are factors that
significantly affect zinc use. Thus, these factors determine
whether the use of organic zinc sources is beneficial. Together,
these data suggest little or no benefit to using organic zinc in
foods low in phytate and calcium (e.g., low calcium is defined as
calcium levels approximating NRC recommendations for respec-
tive species). However, as phytate and/or calcium levels
increase, or demand for zinc increases (e.g., rapid growth rate),
there is greater zinc use from organic zinc sources (parameters
used to assess zinc availability included bone zinc, immune
response and/or growth rate). Furthermore, the more rapidly the
animal grows, the greater the benefit demonstrated for organic
zinc (e.g., fish >chicks [broiler breeds >leghorn-type] >puppies
>pigs). The efficacy decreased as the animal matured, suggest-
ing organic zinc sources in foods may be less beneficial for adult
animals.
In summary, organic forms of minerals may be beneficial
when dietary or physiologic conditions limit mineral availability.
These conditions include: 1) mineral antagonisms caused by
phytate, fiber and imbalances/excesses of other minerals and 2)
increased metabolic demand such as rapid growth rate, repro-
duction and immune challenge.
The Bibliography for Box 6-2 can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 111 ---
Active calcium absorption is affected by the physiology of the
host (i.e., calcium and vitamin D status, age, pregnancy and
lactation).
The other pathways of calcium absorption are facilitated and
passive absorption, which are important in the distal gastroin-
testinal (GI) tract. Passive absorption is a nonsaturable, paracel-
lular route that is independent of vitamin D regulation. The
amount of calcium absorbed in this way depends primarily on
quantity and availability of calcium in the food. No matter
where absorption takes place, vitamin D is the most important
regulator of calcium absorption (Birge and Avioli, 1990). Renal
handling of calcium is also modulated by PTH and calcitonin
but not as much by vitamin D.
Deficiencies and excesses of calcium, as well as calcium-
phosphorus imbalances, should be avoided in dogs and cats
(Box 6-3). A food grossly deficient in calcium, but adequate
in phosphorus can cause secondary hyperparathyroidism. An
all-meat diet devoid of bones, for example, is a very poor
source of calcium. Inadequate calcium intake produces
hypocalcemia, which stimulates release of PTH, which in
turn stimulates production of 1,25-(OH)2-D3, resulting in a
higher fractional absorption of calcium and phosphate, and
lower calcium but higher phosphate concentration in urine.
PTH acts with vitamin D to promote bone resorption and
turnover,
which
may lead to pathologic fractures.
Hypocalcemia is a common problem in diseased states
(chronic or acute renal failure, pancreatitis, eclampsia, etc.),
and parenteral supplementation of calcium and/or calcitriol
(1,25-(OH)2-D3) is sometimes warranted (Chew and
Carothers, 1995). Calcium excess is probably more detrimen-
tal in rapidly growing animals than in adults, especially large-
and giant-breed puppies (Chapter 33). Table 6-1 describes
signs of calcium deficiency and excess.
Research suggests that the dietary requirement of calcium for
growing puppies (especially large breeds) is higher at 1.2% dry
matter (DM) (Hazewinkel et al, 1991; Schoenmakers et al,
1999; Nap et al, 1993) than the previous recommendation of
0.59% (NRC, 1985). The NRC (2006) recommended
allowance for adult dogs and growing puppies after weaning is
0.40 and 0.59% DM calcium (both based on foods containing
4,000 kcal/kg), and for large- and giant-breed puppies at risk
for developmental orthopedic disease, the recommendation is
0.7 to 1.2% DM calcium (based on foods containing 3,800
kcal/kg) (Chapter 33).
A balance study was conducted to determine the calcium
requirement of adult cats (Pastoor et al, 1994). Four levels of
calcium (CaCO3) ranging from 0.27 to 1.62% DM were eval-
uated. The minimum level evaluated (0.27% calcium) resulted
in positive mineral balance with no adverse effect on serum
phosphorus, calcium, magnesium and alkaline phosphatase
concentrations. This level is less than half that of current
AAFCO (2007) recommendations (i.e., 0.6% calcium).
Likewise, two groups of investigators conducting studies in kit-
tens demonstrated lower calcium and phosphorus requirements
than those currently recommended by AAFCO for growth
(i.e., requirements for calcium and phosphorus were 0.5 and
0.63% [Morris and Earle, 1996] and 0.36 and 0.28%, respec-
tively [Pastoor, 1993]). These investigators concluded that the
1% DM calcium recommended by AAFCO (2007) for kittens
is excessive and that the NRC recommendation (2006) of 0.8%
DM calcium was a more defensible allowance for kittens fed
typical moist foods. The current AAFCO (2007) canine and
feline recommendations for calcium are 1.0% for growth/repro-
duction and 0.6% for adult maintenance (DM for both values).
For dogs, this calcium requirement is based on an energy den-
sity of 3.5 kcal/g metabolizable energy (ME), whereas an ener-
gy density of 4.0 kcal/g ME is assumed for cats (AAFCO,
2007). Foods with increased energy densities should have a
proportionally increased amount of calcium to account for
decreased food consumption.
These meat meals are rich sources of calcium because of their
bone content: poultry by-product meal, lamb meal and fish
meal. Grains (corn, rice, etc.) are generally poor sources of cal-
cium. Soybean meal and flaxseed have calcium contents
between those of meat meals and grains. Meats without bone
are poor sources of calcium.The most common calcium supple-
ments used in pet foods are limestone (calcium carbonate), cal-
cium sulfate, calcium chloride, calcium phosphate and bone
meal, ranging in calcium from 16 to 39% (Table 6-2).
113
Minerals and Vitamins
Figure 6-2. Calcium absorption by the intestine and bone resorp-
tion and reabsorption in the kidney are closely regulated by calci-
um-regulating hormones: parathyroid hormone, calcitonin and 1,25-
(OH)2-D3. See text for details.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 112 ---
Phosphorus
Phosphorus is a vital participant in a number of tissues and
functions. After calcium, phosphorus is the second largest con-
stituent of bone and teeth. Phosphorus is a structural compo-
nent of RNA and DNA, high-energy phosphate compounds
such as ATP and cell membranes composed largely of phos-
pholipids. As a component of nucleic acids, high-energy phos-
phate compounds and cell membranes, phosphorus is essential
in cell growth and differentiation, energy use and transfer, fatty
acid transport and amino acid and protein formation.
About 60 to 70% of phosphorus is absorbed from a typical
diet (Allen and Wood, 1994). In general, phosphorus availabil-
ity is greater from animal-based ingredients than from plant-
based ingredients. Phosphorus in meat is found mainly in the
organic form, whereas in plants, phosphorus is in the form of
phytic acid. Phytate phosphorus is only about one-third avail-
able to monogastric animals but availability from different
grains can vary markedly (McDowell, 1992). Intestinal phos-
phorus absorption represents the sum of a saturable, carrier-
mediated component and a nonsaturable, concentration-
dependent component. Regulation of total body phosphorus
requires the coordinated efforts of the kidneys and intestine.
Under conditions of low dietary phosphorus intake, the intes-
tine increases its absorptive efficiency to maximize phosphorus
absorption and the kidneys increase renal phosphorus transport
or minimize urinary phosphorus losses. Hormonally, these
adaptations result from changes in plasma levels of 1,25-
(OH)2-D3 and PTH. Conversely, under conditions of dietary
excess, the kidneys increase excretion of minerals. Table 6-1
describes effects of deficiency and excess. Avoiding excess
dietary phosphorus slows progression of kidney disease
(Chapter 37).
There are few data to make a phosphorus recommendation;
however, the most recent NRC (2006) suggests 1.0 and 0.30%
DM for puppies and adult dogs, respectively.
Similar to the study design for calcium, investigators evaluat-
ed the minimum phosphorus requirement for adult cats
(Pastoor et al, 1995). Four levels of phosphorus (provided as
NaH2PO4•2H2O) ranging from 0.3 to 1.8% DM were evalu-
ated. The minimum level evaluated (0.3% DM phosphorus)
resulted in positive mineral balance with no adverse effect on
serum phosphorus, calcium, magnesium and alkaline phos-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
114
The “ideal” calcium-phosphorus ratio recommended for animals
with simple stomachs is generally considered to be between 1:1
and 2:1. A number of factors, however, influence the importance of
this ratio. Increasing levels of vitamin D reduce the significance of
adverse calcium-phosphorus ratios. Furthermore, the ratio can dif-
fer markedly with the form and availability of the calcium and phos-
phorus supplied in the diet. For example, animals eating foods high
in phytate phosphorus require greater phosphorus intake to meet
their needs. Thus, the ideal calcium-phosphorus ratio would be
lower when foods with these dietary characteristics are fed vs.
foods composed of mostly meat ingredients.
Investigators sometimes debate whether the calcium-phospho-
rus ratio is more important than absolute calcium and phosphorus
levels (Table 1). For all practical purposes, however, if a food were
formulated to meet or slightly exceed an animal’s requirement for
calcium and phosphorus, it would by default provide an optimal
calcium-phosphorus ratio. The more rapid the growth rate (e.g.,
large- and giant-breed puppies >small-breed puppies >adult
dogs), the more critical it is to optimize calcium and phosphorus
levels (Chapter 33). Increasing energy density increases the calci-
um and phosphorus requirement; the younger the animal the more
critical it is that calcium and phosphorus be optimal.
Calcium-phosphorus ratios less than one have been evaluated
in cats. Kealy et al compared the effects of feeding two foods with
different calcium-phosphorus ratios to adult cats for 52 weeks.
(The foods had 1:1 vs. 0.6:1 ratios; dry matter calcium and phos-
phorus levels were 1.27% calcium, 1.29% phosphorus and 0.75%
calcium and 1.24% phosphorus, respectively.) Serum concentra-
tions of total calcium, ionized calcium, phosphorus, PTH, alkaline
phosphatase and vitamin D analogs did not differ between cats fed
the two different foods at any sampling time and no signs of ortho-
pedic diseases or bone loss developed during the study.
Likewise, Morris and Earle evaluated the effects of feeding foods
containing calcium-phosphorus ratios as low as 0.65:1 to kittens
and found no adverse effects, provided dry matter calcium and
phosphorus levels exceeded 0.5 and 0.63%, respectively. Morris
and Earle determined these calcium and phosphorus levels to be
the calcium and phosphorus requirements for kittens. Results
showed that this ratio (0.65:1) was well tolerated by kittens. Feed
consumption, body weight gain, hematologic parameters and con-
centrations of plasma total and ionized calcium, total phosphorus,
alkaline phosphatase, PTH, creatine phosphokinase, total plasma
protein and albumin and plasma 25-OH-D did not differ from val-
ues in kittens fed foods with higher calcium-phosphorus ratios.
Investigators noted significant changes in ionizable calcium con-
centrations; however, at 18 weeks in kittens fed foods with a cal-
cium-phosphorus ratio of 0.38. These studies indicate that cats
may tolerate wider dietary calcium-phosphorus ratios than the pre-
viously recommended ratios between 1:1 and 2:1.
The Bibliography for Box 6-3 can be found at
www.markmorris.org
Table 1. Examples of calcium-phosphorus percentages and ratios.
% calcium/% phosphorus 
Examples
(calcium-phosphorus ratio)
AAFCO adult allowance for 
0.6/0.5 (1.2:1)
calcium and phosphorus in dogs
AAFCO growth allowance for
1.0/0.8 (1.25:1) 
calcium and phosphorus in dogs
Example of why tuna is a poor 
0.157/1.28 (0.12:1)
source of calcium and has a 
poor calcium-phosphorus ratio
Example of a correct ratio, but 
2/1.6 (1.2:1)
excessive calcium and 
phosphorus levels
Box 6-3. Calcium-Phosphorus Ratios.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 113 ---
phatase concentrations. Again, this is lower than the 0.5% DM
phosphorus level currently recommended by AAFCO (2007).
Levels of phosphorus exceeding 0.6% DM were associated
with lower plasma phosphorus concentrations, reduced creati-
nine clearance and decreased magnesium absorption.Thus, the
authors concluded continued feeding of high levels of dietary
phosphorus might be detrimental to renal function. The
AAFCO (2007) recommendation for phosphorus, for both
dogs and cats, is 0.8% for growth and reproduction and 0.5%
for adult maintenance (DM). These values (0.72 and 0.26%
[DM] for kittens and adult cats, respectively) are higher than
those listed in the current NRC (2006).
In general, meat tissue (poultry, lamb, fish, beef) is high in
phosphorus. Eggs and milk products are also relatively rich in
phosphorus. Oilseeds, protein supplements and grains like-
wise contribute significant amounts of phosphorus to pet
foods, due more to their high inclusion rate than to high-
phosphorus concentrations. A number of phosphorus supple-
ments (Table 6-2) are used in pet foods, including calcium
phosphate (monocalcium, dicalcium and tricalcium phos-
phate, defluorinated rock phosphate), sodium phosphates and
phosphoric acid.
115
Minerals and Vitamins
Table 6-2. Common mineral sources.*
Mineral
Source
Chemical formula
Mineral content (%)**
Calcium
Calcium carbonate
CaCo4
39 Ca
0.02 Na
Limestone
CaCO3
38 Ca
0.05 Na
0.01 F
Calcium citrate
24 Ca
Calcium sulfate
CaSO4
23 Ca
Calcium chloride
CaCl2
35 Ca
64 Cl
Calcium and 
Bone meal
24 Ca
12.6 P
0.37 Na
0.05 F
phosphorus
Phosphate, curacao
36 Ca
14 P
0.3 Na
0.54 F
Defluorinated
30-34 Ca
18 P
5.7 Na
0.16 F
Dicalcium
18-24 Ca
18.5 P
0.6 Na
0.14 F
Mono and dicalcium
16-19 Ca
21 P
0.6 Na
0.20 F
Soft rock
17 Ca
9 P
0.1 Na
1.2 F
Sodium tripolyphosphate
0 Ca
25 P
31 Na
0.03 F
Phosphorus
Phosphoric acid
H3PO4
0 Ca
23 P
Tricalcium phosphate
Ca3PO4
31-34 Ca
18 P
Magnesium
Magnesium oxide
MgO
54 Mg
Magnesium sulfate
MgSO4
9 Mg
Potassium
Potassium citrate
36 K
Potassium chloride
KCl
50 K
Potassium sulfate
K2SO4
42 K
Sodium and 
Sodium chloride
NaCl
39 Na
61 Cl
chloride
Sodium acetate
28 Na
Sodium tripolyphosphate
32 Na
25 P
Iron
Ferrous sulfate
FeSO4•H2O
33 Fe
Ferrous sulfate
FeSO4•7H2O
20 Fe
Ferric ammonium citrate
16.5-18.5 Fe
Ferrous fumarate
FeC4•H2O4
32.9 Fe
Ferric chloride
FeCl3•6H2O
20.7 Fe
Ferrous carbonate
FeCO3
48.2 Fe
Ferric oxide
Fe2O3
69.9 Fe
Ferrous oxide
FeO
77.8 Fe
Copper
Cupric carbonate
CuCO3•Cu(OH)2
57.5 Cu
Cupric chloride
CuCl2•2H2O
37.3 Cu
Cupric hydroxide
Cu(OH)2
65.1 Cu
Cupric oxide
CuO
79.9 Cu
Cupric sulfate
CuSO4•5H2O
25.4 Cu
Manganese
Manganese carbonate
MnCO3
47.8 Mn
Manganous chloride
MnCl2•4H2O
27.8 Mn
Manganous oxide
MnO
77.4 Mn
Manganese sulfate
MnSO4•5H2O
22.7 Mn
Manganous sulfate
MnSO4•H2O
32.5 Mn
Zinc
Zinc carbonate
5ZnO•2CO3•4H2O
56.0 Zn
Zinc chloride
ZnCl2
48.0 Zn
Zinc oxide
ZnO
72.0 Zn
Zinc sulfate
ZnSO4•7H2O
22.7 Zn
Zinc sulfate
ZnSO4•H2O
36.4 Zn
Iodine
Calcium iodate
Ca(IO3)2
65.1 I
Potassium iodide
KI
76.4 I
Cuprous iodide
CuI
66.6 I
Iodized salt
48.2 mg/kg I
Selenium
Sodium selenite
Na2SeO3
45.6 Se
26.6 Na
Sodium selenate
Na2SeO4
41.8 Se
24.3 Na
*Adapted from National Research Council. Nutrient Requirements of Cats. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, 1986.
**Actual mineral levels in technical grade sources may vary.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 114 ---
Magnesium
Magnesium is the third largest mineral constituent of bone,
after calcium and phosphorus. Magnesium is involved in the
metabolism of carbohydrates and lipids and acts as a catalyst for
a wide array of enzymes. It is required for cellular oxidation
(e.g., ATP production), it catalyzes most phosphate transfers
(e.g., alkaline phosphatase, hexokinase and deoxyribonuclease)
and it exerts a potent influence on neuromuscular activity. In
light of these functions, it is not surprising that magnesium
deficiency in animals is manifested clinically in a wide range of
disorders, which include retarded growth, hyperirritability and
tetany, peripheral vasodilatation, anorexia, muscle incoordina-
tion and convulsions. Other metabolic aberrations that may
occur in magnesium-deficient animals include calcification of
the kidneys and liver, decreased blood pressure and body tem-
perature and decreased thiamin concentrations in tissues
(Underwood and Mertz, 1987).
From 20 to 70% of dietary magnesium is absorbed (Brody,
1994). Intestinal magnesium absorption represents the sum of
both a carrier-mediated system at low intraluminal concentra-
tions, and simple diffusion at higher concentrations. A number
of dietary and physiologic factors negatively influence magne-
sium absorption, including high levels of dietary phosphorus,
calcium, potassium, fat and protein.
The kidneys play a critical role in magnesium homeostasis.
Approximately 70% of serum magnesium is filtered by
glomeruli; healthy kidneys reabsorb about 95% of the filtered
magnesium (Shils, 1996). Several physiologic and metabolic
factors, drugs and disease states influence magnesium reab-
sorption in nephrons. Certain drugs, such as diuretics, amino-
glycosides,
cisplatin,
cyclosporin,
amphotericin and
methotrexate, can cause increased renal wasting of magne-
sium (Freeman, 1995).
Avoiding excess dietary magnesium is recommended for the
prevention of struvite urinary precipitates in cats and dogs;
however, magnesium deficiency is reported to increase the risk
of calcium oxalate urolithiasis in rats (Driessens and Verbeeck,
1990). Furthermore, magnesium supplementation has been
advocated to prevent calcium oxalate urolithiasis in people.
However, this practice is very controversial because clinical tri-
als have demonstrated mixed efficacy.The relationship of mag-
nesium to feline and canine urinary calcium oxalate precipitates
is unknown; however, ensuring magnesium concentrations
above the minimum requirement is considered safe (Chapters
40, 43 and 46).
Conversely, increased magnesium supplementation may be
warranted under certain clinical conditions in which magne-
sium stores are depleted. The GI tract and kidneys are the pri-
mary potential routes for magnesium excretion. Magnesium
deficiencies may also result from renal losses secondary to renal
tubular acidosis, hypercalcemia, hyperthyroidism, hypoparathy-
roidism and use of diuretics. Additionally, epidemiologic data
and rat studies suggest that low urinary magnesium to calcium
ratios may increase the risk for calcium oxalate formation
(Driessens and Verbeeck, 1990). Table 6-1 describes signs of
deficiency and excess.
The minimum requirement for magnesium in adult cats has
been evaluated (Pastoor, 1993). Four levels of magnesium
(MgCO3) were compared. Positive mineral balance was
observed even at the lowest magnesium level (0.02% DM) and
no adverse effects were noted in serum magnesium and alkaline
phosphatase concentrations.This magnesium level is half of the
current NRC (2006) and AAFCO recommendation (2007).
Extrapolation of these results, which were obtained by feeding
semi-purified diets, to commercial foods should be made cau-
tiously because of the differences in ingredients used and the
greater potential for mineral antagonisms and decreased avail-
ability that may occur in practical diets. AAFCO (2007) rec-
ommends 0.08% DM magnesium for growth and reproduction
and 0.04% DM magnesium for adult maintenance for cats
(AAFCO, 2007). The AAFCO (2007) magnesium recom-
mendation for dogs is 0.04% DM for both lifestages, whereas
the current NRC (2006) suggests 0.04% DM for puppies and
0.06% DM for adult dogs.
Ingredients containing bone (bone meal, lamb meal),
oilseed/protein supplements (flaxseed, soybean meal and other
legumes such as pea protein) and unrefined grains and fiber
sources (wheat bran, oat bran, beet pulp, soymill run) are rich in
magnesium. Common magnesium supplements include mag-
nesium oxide and magnesium sulfate.
Potassium
Potassium is the most abundant intracellular cation and the
third most abundant mineral in the body. Potassium is involved
in a number of functions, including: 1) maintaining acid-base
balance, 2) maintaining osmotic balance, 3) transmitting nerve
impulses, 4) facilitating muscle contractility and 5) serving as a
cofactor in several enzyme systems (energy transfer and use,
protein synthesis and carbohydrate metabolism).
Potassium is absorbed primarily by simple diffusion from the
upper small intestine, although some absorption also occurs in
the lower small intestine and large intestine. Potassium avail-
ability is relatively high (95% or higher) for most foodstuffs
(McDowell, 1992).Yet, in contrast to most minerals, potassium
is not readily stored and must be supplied daily in the diet.
Thus, it is important that foods for dogs and cats contain ade-
quate potassium. Increased intake of potassium is unlikely to
cause sustained hyperkalemia unless renal excretion of potassi-
um is impaired. Administration of certain drugs predisposes
patients to hyperkalemia (e.g., nonspecific β-adrenergic block-
ers and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors).
Table 6-1 describes signs of deficiency and excess. Increasing
protein, energy density or chloride, and other factors such as
stress (heat, exercise, vomiting and diarrhea) and milk produc-
tion increase the requirement for potassium. AAFCO (2007)
recommends 0.6% DM potassium for both dogs and cats for all
lifestages.These levels are higher than the current NRC (2006)
DM potassium recommendation of 0.44% for puppies, 0.40%
for adult dogs, 0.40% for kittens and 0.52% for adult cats.
Rich sources of potassium include soybean meal, unrefined
grains and fiber sources (soymill run, sunflower hulls, rice bran,
wheat bran) and yeast. Potassium supplements commonly
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
116
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 115 ---
added to pet foods include potassium citrate, potassium chlo-
ride and potassium sulfate.
Sodium and Chloride
Sodium and chloride, in addition to potassium, are important
for maintaining osmotic pressure, regulating acid-base equilib-
rium and transmitting nerve impulses and muscle contractions
via Na-K-ATPase (sodium pump). In addition, sodium and
chloride control the passage of nutrients into cells. Sodium ions
must be present in the lumen of the small intestine for absorp-
tion of sugars and amino acids. Insufficient sodium concentra-
tions decrease the use of digested protein and energy. Sodium
also influences calcium absorption and mobilization and may
affect absorption of several water-soluble vitamins (e.g.,
riboflavin, thiamin and ascorbic acid) that are sodium coupled
(McDowell, 1992).
Sodium and chloride are readily absorbed, principally from
the upper small intestine, and excreted predominantly in the
urine with smaller amounts in feces and perspiration. Marked
losses of salt can occur through perspiration in some species,
secretion in milk, vomiting and diarrhea. When sodium intake
is inadequate, the body has a remarkable capacity for conserv-
ing sodium by excreting extremely low levels in the urine.
Chloride metabolism is controlled in relation to sodium. For
example, excess urinary excretion of sodium is accompanied by
urinary excretion of chloride.
Hormones acting to maintain a constant sodium-potassium
ratio in extracellular fluid regulate sodium concentrations in the
body. Aldosterone, secreted from the adrenal cortex, regulates
reabsorption of sodium from the renal tubules. Antidiuretic
hormone from the posterior pituitary responds to osmotic pres-
sure changes in the extracellular fluid. Both hormones maintain
a constant sodium-potassium ratio.
A number of factors influence the sodium requirement. The
requirement is increased during reproduction, lactation, rapid
growth and heat stress and with high dietary potassium levels.
In people, the average sodium intake exceeds the recommend-
ed requirement by 15-fold (Stamler, 1995). Likewise, the sodi-
um content of certain pet foods exceeds the recommended level
by four- to 15-fold (Chapter 36). Investigators determined the
sodium requirement of kittens to be 0.16% (DM or 0.30 mg
Na/kcal ME) based on aldosterone concentration in plasma
(Yu and Morris, 1997). The same investigators determined the
requirement for adult cats was 0.08% DM sodium or 0.15 mg
Na/kcal ME (Yu and Morris, 1999).The AAFCO (2007) rec-
ommendation for sodium in cats is 0.2% DM for both
lifestages, whereas in dogs, the recommendation is 0.3% DM
for growth and reproduction and 0.06% DM for adult mainte-
nance. The current NRC (2006) sodium recommendation is
0.14% DM for kittens and 0.068% DM for adult cats. The
NRC (2006) suggests a 0.22% minimum DM sodium require-
ment for puppies and 0.08% DM for adult dogs.
High sodium intake has long been reported to increase the
risk of hypertension in people and animals (Stamler, 1995). Pet
populations with increased risk of hypertension include senior
dogs and cats and those with renal disease, cardiac disease,
hyperthyroid disease or obesity. Pet food manufacturers some-
times use dietary salt supplementation to increase water intake
in cats with lower urinary tract disease. High sodium intake in
the short term effectively increases water intake, urine output
and urine dilution, thus lowering the risk of urolithiasis, but
may have detrimental effects in the long term. Kirk (2002)
showed that high-sodium intake (1.1% DM) over a three-
month period, increased serum urea nitrogen, phosphorus and
creatinine concentrations in cats with preexisting renal disease.
In addition, the high-sodium food increased cardiac left ven-
tricular fractional shortening and lowered plasma aldosterone
levels, evidence suggesting that this sodium chloride load
required both the heart and kidney to work harder. Similarly,
both the NRC Mineral Tolerance of Animals (2005) and the
NRC Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and Cats (2006) recom-
mend a safe upper limit for sodium at 1.5% DM for adult dogs,
and 1.0 and 1.5% DM for kittens and adult cats, respectively.
At higher levels of sodium intake (≥2%), studies showed
reduced food intake, negative potassium balance and vomiting.
In the absence of studies establishing chloride requirements
for dogs or cats, the DM recommendation for chloride is 1.5
times that of sodium. This value is comparable to the Na:Cl
requirement ratio for other species. Table 6-1 describes signs of
deficiency and excess (Case 6-1).
The effect of dietary sodium chloride on blood pressure has
generally been attributed to the sodium ion. However, it is clear
from a number of studies that both sodium and chloride are
necessary to inhibit renin production (Kotchen et al, 1978;
Kurtz et al, 1987). Salts such as sodium chloride, potassium
chloride, lysine hydrochloride (but not lysine glutamate, sodi-
um bicarbonate, potassium bicarbonate) inhibited renin pro-
duction in sodium chloride-deprived rats and people.
Fish, eggs, dried whey, poultry by-product meal and soy iso-
late are ingredients high in sodium and chloride. Sodium
and/or chloride supplements typically added to pet foods
include salt, sodium phosphates, calcium chloride, choline
chloride, potassium chloride and sodium acetate.
Microminerals
Iron
Iron is present in several enzymes and other proteins responsi-
ble for oxygen activation (oxidases and oxygenases), for electron
transport (cytochromes) and for oxygen transport (hemoglobin,
myoglobin). Because of the limited capacity of the body to
excrete iron, iron homeostasis is maintained primarily by
adjusting iron absorption. Iron in foods exists in two forms: 1)
heme iron present in hemoglobin and myoglobin and 2) non-
heme iron present in grains and plant sources.
Heme iron absorption is not greatly affected by iron status or
other dietary factors. (Two exceptions are meat, which
enhances heme iron absorption, and calcium, which inhibits
heme and nonheme iron absorption.) In contrast to absorption
of heme iron, absorption of nonheme iron is markedly influ-
enced by iron status and by several dietary factors such as phy-
tate, tannins and excesses of calcium, phosphorus, manganese,
zinc, copper and ascorbic acid (Hallberg and Rossander-
117
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 116 ---
Hulthen, 1993).
The amount of iron absorbed from food is thus determined
by three factors: 1) iron status of the body, 2) availability of
dietary iron (as affected by other ingredients and nutrients) and
3) amounts of heme and nonheme iron in food (Hallberg and
Rossander-Hulthen, 1993).
Iron is transported by plasma and is taken up by the bone
marrow for hemoglobin synthesis. Although a small amount of
hemoglobin circulates in plasma, by far the greatest amount of
plasma iron is complexed to the specific iron-binding β1-glob-
ulin transferrin. The degree of saturation of transferrin affects
deposition of iron in liver stores and the supply of iron to red
blood cell precursors. At saturation levels above 60%, much of
the iron is deposited in the liver. Under normal conditions, only
30 to 40% of the transferrin is saturated; the remaining 60 to
70% represents an unbound or latent reserve (Morris, 1987).
Iron is stored predominantly as ferritin and hemosiderin in
liver, bone marrow and spleen. Normally, iron is stored prima-
rily as ferritin. As tissue iron concentrations increase, however,
the concentration of hemosiderin increases more than that of
ferritin. Excretion of iron is limited. Only negligible amounts of
iron appear in urine; the iron appearing in feces is predomi-
nantly unabsorbed iron. Iron is continuously lost in sweat, hair
and nails.
Investigators determined that the iron requirement of kittens
and puppies fed a phytate-free purified diet is 80 mg iron/kg of
food (DM) (Chausow and Czarnecki-Maulden, 1987). This
requirement is the AAFCO (2007) recommendation for iron
for dogs and cats, for both growth/reproduction and adult
maintenance lifestages. The new NRC (2006) recommends a
minimum of 88 mg/kg DM iron for growth and 30 mg/kg
DM iron for adult dogs.Similar to AAFCO allowances (2007),
the minimum NRC (2006) iron recommendation for cats is 80
mg/kg DM for growth and adult lifestages. Most pet foods are
high in iron because of the high iron concentrations found in
meat ingredients, especially organ meats. Furthermore, studies
have shown the availability of iron to be relatively high from
liver, muscle and animal by-products (Elvehjem et al, 1933;
Conrad et al, 1980). Consequently, iron deficiency is not of
practical concern with most pet foods.
Although iron levels may be high in pet foods (levels some-
times exceed the requirement by 15-fold without supplementa-
tion), AAFCO has set a maximum level of 3,000 mg iron/kg of
food for dogs (no maximum is established for cats), which
clearly exceeds dietary concentrations of iron in most typical
pet foods. Iron excesses should be avoided because of potential
antagonism with other minerals (e.g., zinc and copper). Table
6-1 lists signs of deficiency and excess.
Chronic blood loss eventually depletes iron reserves and
causes a microcytic, hypochromic anemia. The most common
chronic blood loss in dogs and cats occurs with blood-sucking
intestinal (hookworms) and external (fleas, ticks) parasites.
Young puppies and kittens are especially vulnerable because of
the low-iron content of milk.
Iron concentrations are high in most meat ingredients, espe-
cially organ meats such as liver, spleen and lungs. Other ingre-
dients rich in iron include dicalcium phosphate and fiber
sources such as beet pulp, soymill run and peanut hulls. In fact,
poultry studies have shown that the iron contained in dicalci-
um phosphate alone in a corn-soybean meal diet can meet a
chick’s requirement for iron (Deming and Czarnecki-
Maulden, 1989).
Typical iron sources include ferrous sulfate, ferric chloride,
ferrous fumarate, ferrous carbonate and iron oxide. The iron in
iron oxide, however, is not biologically available. Iron oxide is
often added to pet foods to impart a “meaty red” color. A rela-
tively high level of iron oxide is added (up to 0.04%) when iron
oxide is used as a pigment in pet foods. Analytically, a pet food
containing iron oxide will appear to be high in iron, but may
not be high in available iron. Thus, the contribution of iron
from iron oxide should be considered when evaluating the iron
adequacy of foods containing iron oxide (e.g., 0.04% DM iron
oxide in a moist food contributes 933 mg iron/kg of food).
Zinc
Zinc is a constituent or activator of more than 200 enzymes, so
it is involved in a number of diverse physiologic functions.
Some of zinc’s primary functions include: 1) nucleic acid
metabolism, 2) protein synthesis, 3) carbohydrate metabolism,
4) immunocompetence, 5) skin and wound healing, 6) cell
replication and differentiation, 7) growth and 8) reproduction.
Zinc also interacts with hormone production, most notably
testosterone, adrenal corticosteroids and insulin. Zinc home-
ostasis is controlled through absorption and excretion.
The mechanism and control of zinc absorption are still not
fully understood. Zinc absorption occurs primarily in the duo-
denum, jejunum and ileum. Only small amounts are absorbed
from the stomach. Zinc absorption is markedly affected by
other dietary components. Phytate, for example, decreases zinc
absorption, whereas low molecular weight binding ligands such
as citrate, picolinate, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)
and amino acids such as histidine and glutamate enhance zinc
absorption (Hambidge et al, 1986). The liver is the primary
organ involved in zinc metabolism. When hepatic zinc content
is increased above normal levels, additional zinc is associated
with metallothionein, a metal-binding protein thought to have
a role in storage and detoxification of zinc, copper, cadmium
and other metals.
Zinc in plasma is bound to protein in two forms: 1) firmly
bound zinc that appears to bind to globulin (approximately
33% of total plasma zinc) and 2) loosely bound zinc complexed
with albumin (66% of total plasma zinc) (McDowell, 1992).
Storage of zinc is limited except in bone; stores increase only
slightly as dietary zinc increases. Zinc concentration in bone
has been used as a measure of zinc absorption and/or zinc sta-
tus in young growing animals, whereas plasma zinc is only a
reliable index under controlled experimental conditions.
Zinc is excreted primarily in the feces as unabsorbed and
endogenous zinc (pancreatic juice, bile, other digestive secre-
tions). Excretion of endogenous zinc in feces varies according
to the balance between true absorption and metabolic needs.
Variable excretion is one of the primary mechanisms used to
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
118
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 117 ---
maintain zinc homeostasis. Thus, both absorption and excre-
tion are important in regulating zinc balance.
Zinc deficiency is probably more of a practical concern with
pet foods than is toxicity, because: 1) zinc is relatively nontoxic
and 2) its availability is decreased by a number of factors (phy-
tate, high dietary levels of calcium, phosphate, copper, iron,
cadmium and chromium). The antagonistic effects of calcium
are greatest when phytate is also present, resulting in the forma-
tion of a highly insoluble complex of calcium, phytate and zinc.
Signs of zinc deficiency have been reported to occur in dogs fed
cereal-based dry foods (e.g., grains may contain significant con-
centrations of phytate), even when the zinc content of the food
exceeded NRC minimum requirements (NRC, 2006; Morris
and Rogers, 1994).
AAFCO recommends 120 mg/kg DM zinc for dogs and
75 mg/kg DM zinc for cats (2007). For trace minerals,
AAFCO makes the same recommendations for adult mainte-
nance and growth/reproduction foods. In livestock, however,
the requirement for zinc is greatly increased during growth
and reproduction. NRC (2006) recommends a minimum of
100 mg/kg DM zinc for growth vs. 60 mg/kg DM zinc for
adult dogs; NRC makes similar zinc recommendations for
cats (i.e., 75 and 74 mg/kg DM zinc in foods for growth and
adults, respectively).
Signs of zinc deficiency include anorexia, decreased growth
rate, alopecia, parakeratosis, impaired reproduction, depressed
immune function and growth disorders of the skeleton
(Chapter 33). Naturally occurring zinc-responsive dermatoses
have been described (Chapter 32).
Although relatively nontoxic, excess dietary zinc can inter-
fere with other minerals (iron and copper), thus excesses
should be avoided.The only reported cases of zinc toxicosis in
dogs or cats have been due to dietary indiscretion (e.g., con-
sumption of die-case nuts from animal carriers or pennies)
(Case 6-2). Table 6-1 describes effects of zinc deficiency and
excess. Ingredients naturally high in zinc include most meats,
fiber sources and dicalcium phosphate. Zinc supplements
most commonly used in pet foods are zinc oxide, zinc sulfate,
zinc chloride and zinc carbonate.
Copper
Of the many copper-containing proteins, four enzyme systems
may play key roles in the clinical signs associated with copper
deficiency: 1) the ferroxidase activity of ceruloplasmin explains
in part the disturbances of hematopoiesis in copper deficiency,
2) the monoamine oxidase enzymes may account for the role of
copper in pigmentation and control of neurotransmitters and
neuropeptides, 3) lysyl oxidase is essential for maintaining the
integrity of connective tissue, a function that explains distur-
bances in lungs, bones and the cardiovascular system and 4) the
copper enzymes cytochrome C oxidase and superoxide dismu-
tase (SOD) play a central role in the terminal steps of oxidative
metabolism and the defense against superoxide radicals, respec-
tively. These functions have been postulated to account for the
disturbances of the nervous system as seen in neonatal ataxia in
several animal species with copper deficiency (Davis and
Mertz, 1987).
In most species, copper can be absorbed in all segments of
the GI tract; however, the small intestine is the major site of
absorption (Davis and Mertz, 1987). Although the biochemi-
cal mechanisms are not fully understood, there is good evidence
that intestinal absorption of copper is regulated by the need of
the animal and that metallothionein (a metal-binding protein)
plays a key role in regulation. Copper appears to be absorbed by
two mechanisms, one saturable, suggesting active transport at
low dietary copper concentrations and the other unsaturable,
suggesting simple diffusion at high dietary copper levels.
Most copper in plasma is bound to ceruloplasmin, a copper-
binding protein. Newly absorbed copper, however, may be
transported from the intestine loosely bound to albumin or cer-
tain amino acids. In this form, the element is readily available
to the liver and other tissues, in contrast to the much more
tightly regulated distribution of ceruloplasmin-bound copper.
This difference in availability may explain the tissue damage
caused by copper accumulation in hepatotoxicosis seen in
Bedlington terriers and people with Wilson’s disease, in which
the ceruloplasmin transport protein is lacking.
The liver is the central organ for copper metabolism. Hepatic
concentrations reflect an animal’s intake and copper status.
Copper is excreted primarily through the feces. Most fecal cop-
per is unabsorbed, but active excretion also occurs via the bile.
Copper homeostasis is maintained primarily through absorption.
Dietary copper deficiency has been reported to occur in dogs
and cats and thus is of practical concern (Morris and Rogers,
1994) (Case 6-3) Availability of copper from different foods
and supplements can vary greatly, so the requirement for cop-
per is difficult to define. The requirement can vary several-fold
depending on the source of copper in the food and the level of
other ingredients/nutrients/non-nutrients (e.g., interactions
with phytate, calcium, zinc and iron).The AAFCO (2007) rec-
ommendation for copper in dogs is 7.3 mg/kg DM.
Separate copper requirements are recommended for extrud-
ed cat foods (15 mg/kg DM) vs. moist cat foods (5 mg/kg
DM) during growth/reproduction. The recommended
AAFCO (2007) copper level for maintenance of adult cats is
5 mg/kg DM, regardless of the food form. The rationale for
separate copper requirements for cats (extruded vs. canned) is
unclear. Investigators demonstrated increased needs for cop-
per during reproduction in queens fed extruded foods.a
Separate requirements for extruded and canned foods were
recommended in the absence of reproduction data for cats fed
moist foods.
Researchers studied chicks to evaluate the availability of cop-
per from feed ingredients typically used in pet foods (Aoyagi et
al, 1993). Results showed that copper availability was essential-
ly zero from copper oxide and pork liver. Beef, sheep and turkey
liver, however, were highly available sources of copper. AAFCO
(2007) has recommended that pet food companies discontinue
the use of copper oxide as a copper source based on studies of
swine, poultry, dogs and cats in which researchers have demon-
strated the poor availability of copper from copper oxide
(Aoyagi and Baker, 1993; Cromwell et al, 1989; Czarnecki-
119
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 118 ---
Mauldin et al, 1993; Fascetti et al, 1998, 2000).
Signs of copper deficiency in cats include poor reproductive
performance,early fetal loss, fetal deformities, cannibalism, coat
hypopigmentation, kinked tails and inverted carpi.a Clinical
signs in dogs include hair depigmentation and hyperextension
of the distal forelimbs (Zentek and Meyer, 1991). Table 6-1
lists signs of deficiency and excess.
Copper excess in dogs and cats with normal metabolism is
of much less practical concern than copper deficiency, but can
interfere with iron and zinc use. Bedlington, West Highland
white and Skye terriers, however, are predisposed to heredi-
tary autosomal recessive disease resulting in copper hepatoxi-
cosis (Chapter 68). Anti-copper therapies such as zinc supple-
mentation and orally administered tetrathiomolybdate have
been used to treat dogs with this genetic disorder (NRC,
2006). AAFCO (2007) has set a safe upper limit of 250
mg/kg DM copper for dogs, but no safe upper limit for cats.
NRC (2006) lists no safe upper limit of copper for either dogs
or cats.
Most meat ingredients, especially organ meats, are rich in
copper. Ruminant livers are extremely high in copper; concen-
trations are five to 10 times higher than in monogastric livers.b
Typical copper supplements include cupric sulfate, cupric car-
bonate and cupric chloride.
Manganese
Manganese deficiency is of little practical relevance in dogs and
cats, but is of practical relevance in birds. AAFCO (2007) rec-
ommends 5 mg/kg DM manganese for dogs and 7.5 mg/kg
DM for cats, which is similar to NRC (2006) recommenda-
tions. The manganese requirement for birds is 10 to 12 times
higher than that for people, pigs, dogs and cats (McDowell,
1992).Manganese functions as an enzyme activator or as a con-
stituent of metalloenzymes. Although there are only a few
manganese-containing metalloenzymes (e.g., arginase, pyru-
vate carboxylase and manganese-superoxide dismutase), many
enzymes are activated by manganese, including hydrolases,
kinases, decarboxylases and transferases. Other cations (espe-
cially magnesium), however, can partially substitute for man-
ganese with little or no loss in enzymatic activity, thus man-
ganese deficiency may not adversely affect physiologic or meta-
bolic function (McDowell, 1992).
Manganese is also essential in bone and cartilage develop-
ment because it activates glycosyltransferases (i.e., enzymes
important for polysaccharide and glycoprotein synthesis). In
addition, manganese is involved in reproduction and lipid
metabolism (e.g., manganese is involved in the biosynthesis of
choline and cholesterol).
Manganese homeostasis is maintained through regulation of
absorption and excretion. Manganese is absorbed throughout
the small intestine in a rapidly saturable process. Low molecu-
lar weight ligands, such as L-histidine and citrate, enhance
absorption, whereas excessive concentrations of phosphorus,
iron and cobalt can reduce absorption. Manganese is excreted
via several routes that combine to provide an efficient homeo-
static mechanism to regulate manganese levels in tissues. Bile
flow is the primary route of excretion, but manganese is also
excreted in pancreatic juice and in the small intestine.
Table 6-1 lists signs of manganese deficiency and excess.
Ingredients rich in manganese include fiber sources, menhaden
fish meal and dicalcium phosphate. Manganese supplements
include manganese oxide, manganese sulfate, manganous chlo-
ride and manganese carbonate.
Iodine
Iodine is a constituent of the thyroid hormones 3,5,3’,5’-
tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine, T4) and 3,5,3’-triiodothyronine
(T3). Thyroid hormones have an active role in thermoregula-
tion, intermediary metabolism, reproduction, growth and
development, circulation and muscle function. Thyroid hor-
mones also: 1) influence physical and mental growth and dif-
ferentiation and maturation of tissues, 2) affect other endocrine
glands, especially the hypophysis and the gonads, 3) influence
neuromuscular functioning and 4) have an effect on the integu-
ment, hair and fur (McDowell, 1992).
The thyroid glands actively trap iodine daily to ensure an
adequate supply of thyroid hormone.This trapping mechanism
regulates a more or less constant iodine supply to the thyroid
glands over a wide range of plasma iodide levels. Figure 6-3
outlines the steps of thyroid-hormone biosynthesis (Hetzel and
Maberly, 1986). Iodine trapping is an active transport mecha-
nism linked to Na+/K+-ATPase activity. Thyroid-stimulating
hormone, which is released from the pituitary gland to regulate
thyroid activity, also regulates this mechanism. A thyroid-per-
oxidase enzyme oxidizes iodide, which is released from thyroid
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
120
Figure 6-3. Diagram showing pathways of thyroid-hormone synthe-
sis from iodine within the thyroid gland. (Adapted with permission
from Hetzel BS, Maberly GF. Iodine. In: Mertz W, ed. Trace
Elements in Human and Animal Nutrition, 5th ed. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press Inc, 1986; 147.) See text for details.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 119 ---
cells into the colloid space. Iodine then combines with tyrosine
residues associated with thyroglobulin protein to form
monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and diiodotyrosine (DIT). The oxi-
dation process proceeds further under the influence of the thy-
roid-peroxidase enzyme to couple MIT and DIT to form var-
ious iodothyronines (e.g., T3 and T4). Finally, iodinated thy-
roglobulin and thyroid hormones are reabsorbed into the thy-
roid cells and exposed to proteolytic enzymes.Much of the pro-
tein and iodinated tyrosines are lysed and returned as substrates
to repeat the process. At the same time, some thyroid hormones
are released into the circulation. Regulating the action of thy-
roid hormones is a complex process involving interaction
among neurotransmitters, hormones and enzymes in the cen-
tral nervous system, the pituitary gland, the thyroid glands, the
circulation and peripheral tissues.
Investigators have estimated the iodine requirement for
adult dogs to be 0.56 mg/kg DM (Belshaw et al, 1975).
AAFCO (2007) recommends an iodine level of 1.5 mg/kg
DM for dogs. This margin of safety is prudent in practical
foods to overcome potential effects of goitrogens and negative
mineral antagonisms.
A recent study (Wedekind et al, In press) estimated the
iodine requirement for adult cats to be 0.46 mg/kg DM. This
estimate was based upon three measurements of iodine status:
regression of Tc 99m thyroid:salivary ratio (scintigraphy),
iodine balance and urinary iodine excretion after iodine intake.
These estimates agreed closely with the iodine requirement
determined for dogs (Belshaw et al, 1975) and people (DRI,
2001). This estimate is higher than current AAFCO (2007)
minimum iodine recommendations for adult cats (i.e., 0.35
mg/kg DM iodine), but is much lower than the NRC (2006)
recommended iodine allowance (1.4 mg iodine/kg diet). Note
that the NRC (2006) recommendation does not agree closely
with current AAFCO recommendations and was based upon
data derived from two studies (Scott et al, 1961; Ranz et al,
2002). Unfortunately, these studies should not have been used
as a basis for establishing the iodine requirement of cats. The
Scott (1961) study used a nutritionally incomplete or imbal-
anced diet (i.e., the diet used was an all meat diet [beef hearts],
which was grossly deficient in calcium).The Ranz (2002) study
was of short duration (i.e., 54 days total with only a seven-day
period for each iodine level). In this study, the minimum iodine
level evaluated, approximately 4.1 mg/kg iodine, was not low
enough to yield a valid iodine requirement estimate.
Interestingly, the previous NRC (1986) did not cite the Scott
(1961) reference.
The iodine requirement is influenced by physiologic state
and diet. Lactating animals require more dietary iodine because
about 10% of the iodine intake is normally excreted in milk
(McDowell, 1992). Likewise, the presence of goitrogenic sub-
stances and nutrient excesses of certain minerals (e.g., arsenic,
bromide, fluoride, cobalt, manganese, calcium and potassium)
may increase the need for iodine (NRC, 2005). Potential
sources of goitrogens in pet foods include peas, peanuts, soy-
beans and flaxseed. Fish, eggs and iodized salt are rich sources
of iodine, whereas most animal proteins are moderate sources
of iodine. Iodine supplements typically used in pet foods
include calcium iodate, potassium iodide and cuprous iodide.
Since the late 1970s, feline hyperthyroidism has become a
more frequently diagnosed condition. However, much remains
to be learned about this endocrinopathy (e.g., prevalence and
cause). Hypothyroidism is a much more prevalent thyroid dis-
order in dogs. Both iodine excess and deficiency may result in
subclinical or overt thyroid dysfunction.
Current AAFCO (2007) guidelines set a maximum safe level
for iodine for dogs at 50 mg/kg, whereas NRC (2006) recom-
mends 4 mg/kg as a safe upper limit. Neither NRC nor
AAFCO sets a safe upper limit for iodine for cats. However,
estimates for establishing safe upper limits and/or lowest observ-
able adverse effect level for cats were determined in a recent
study (Wedekind et al, In press). In people, guidelines have been
established to define deficiency, adequacy and iodine excess
(Laurberg et al,2001) based upon urinary iodine concentrations.
When these guidelines are applied to cats (corrected for meta-
bolic equivalent basis; BW
0.67), dietary intakes between 0.46 and
3.5 mg/kg were considered optimal, whereas dietary intakes
exceeding 3.5 mg/kg were defined as excessive. In addition, cats
fed the highest dietary iodine intake (8.8 to 9.2 mg/kg iodine)
for one year had significantly reduced FT4 and numerically
lowered TT4 and TT3 at 12 months.Thus, these findings sug-
gest 3.5 mg/kg as a no observable adverse effect level or safe
upper level and intakes of 8.8 mg/kg as a lowest observable
adverse effect level. Table 6-1 lists signs of iodine deficiency and
excess. See Chapter 29 for more information about iodine.
Selenium
Selenium is an essential constituent of glutathione peroxidase,
which helps protect cellular and subcellular membranes from
oxidative damage. Glutathione peroxidase and vitamin E work
synergistically to reduce the destructive effects of peroxidative
reactions on living cells. Selenium spares vitamin E in at least
three ways: 1) preserves the integrity of the pancreas, which
allows normal fat digestion, and thus normal vitamin E absorp-
tion, 2) reduces the amount of vitamin E required to maintain
integrity of lipid membranes via glutathione peroxidase and 3)
aids retention of vitamin E in the blood plasma in some
unknown way.
Vitamin E reduces the selenium requirement in at least two
ways: 1) maintains body selenium in an active form, or prevents
losses from the body and 2) prevents destruction of lipids with-
in membranes, thereby inhibiting production of hydroperoxides
and reducing the amount of the selenium-dependent enzyme
needed to destroy peroxides formed in cells (Scott et al, 1982).
Selenium also has a vital role in maintaining normal thyroid
hormone and iodine metabolism, particularly through the con-
trol of deiodinase enzymes that regulate conversion of T4 to T3
(Arthur, 1993).
The duodenum is the main site of selenium absorption.There
is no homeostatic control of selenium absorption regardless of
the dietary selenium concentration. Likewise, selenium status
also appears to have little effect on selenium uptake. Excretion
of selenium, however, is homeostatically regulated. Urinary
121
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 120 ---
excretion of selenium is closely related to dietary intake in rats
and people (Levander, 1986). A dietary threshold is reached at
low-selenium intakes, wherein excretion is shut down, thus con-
serving selenium. Urinary selenium increases proportionally at
higher selenium intakes. Fecal excretion, on the other hand,
remains constant over a wide range of selenium intakes.
Although selenium deficiency has been observed experimen-
tally in dogs (Van Vleet, 1975), the incidence of selenium defi-
ciency has not been reported for dogs and cats. Likewise, sele-
nium toxicity has not been noted in dogs and cats, despite high
concentrations (>4 mg selenium/kg food) in seafood and fish-
containing cat foods. AAFCO (2007) selenium recommenda-
tions are 0.11 mg/kg of food DM for dogs and 0.1 mg/kg of
food DM for cats. The NRC (2006) recommended allowance
is 0.35 and 0.30 mg DM selenium/kg diet for dogs and cats,
respectively (growth and adult recommendations were not dif-
ferent). This increase in minimum recommendations, relative
to previous NRC publications, takes into account potentially
low availability of selenium in pet food ingredients.
Selenium availability is highly influenced by the chemical form
of selenium (supplied as a supplement or from foodstuffs).
Furthermore, the requirement for selenium can be partially
replaced by vitamin E. Selenium in animal feeds is highly vari-
able primarily due to the variable selenium status of soils. Studies
with pigs demonstrated that inorganic selenium (sodium selen-
ite) and organic selenium (selenium yeast) were equally effective
in supporting glutathione peroxidase activity, but that selenium
stores in tissues (liver and muscle) were greater when organic
selenium was fed (Mahan, 1995). Selenium content in milk is
also higher when selenium is supplied in the organic form.
Fish products are rich in selenium (1 to 6 mg selenium/kg),
but selenium availability in these ingredients is low (Wedekind
et al, 1997; Wedekind et al, 1998; Combs and Combs, 1986).
Selenium levels exceeding 2 mg selenium/kg of food DM have
not been reported to be toxic for cats. Cats may be able to tol-
erate higher selenium levels because the high-protein foods
typically fed to cats are protective against high-selenium levels
(Levander, 1986).
Current AAFCO (2007) guidelines set a maximum safe sele-
nium level for dogs at 2 mg/kg; however, NRC (2006) does not
list a safe upper limit for cats. Neither NRC nor AAFCO has
listed a safe upper limit for selenium for cats. Fish, eggs and
liver are ingredients rich in selenium. Table 6-1 lists signs of
deficiency and excess (Case 6-4).Typical selenium supplements
include sodium selenite and sodium selenite. See Chapter 29
for more information about selenium.
Ultra-Trace Minerals
The minimum dietary requirements for ultra-trace elements in
dogs and cats have not been determined. Based on research in
other species, it is probable that supplemental micronutrients,
such as chromium and boron, may be beneficial under certain
physiologic and dietary circumstances.
Chromium
In 1957, investigators identified a compound they called glu-
cose tolerance factor (GTF) that restored impaired glucose tol-
erance in rats (Schwarz and Mertz, 1959). Chromium was
identified as the active component. Chromium is ubiquitous in
water, soil and living matter; however, tissue levels in animals
are very low because of limited uptake by plants and absorption
by animals. Furthermore, many forms of chromium are poorly
available. Therefore, supplementation with an available form
may be warranted. Chromium in an organically bound form
(e.g., GTF) is absorbed better, has a different tissue distribution
and is more available to fetuses than inorganic chromium
(Mertz and Roginski, 1971).
Several studies in people and other animals have demonstrat-
ed beneficial effects of chromium supplementation (in chromi-
um deficiency or diabetics) including: 1) improved glucose tol-
erance, 2) reversed hyperglycemia and glycosuria, 3) decreased
circulating insulin concentrations, 4) decreased plasma lipid
concentrations, 5) decreased body fat, 6) increased protein
accretion, 7) improved immune response and 8) reduced corti-
sol production in response to heat and transport stress
(Anderson, 1987; Page et al, 1993; Moonsie-Shageer and
Mowat, 1993). Not all studies have shown improvements in
these variables. This lack of consistent response may be
accounted for by an adequate chromium nutriture for some
individuals or some factor other than chromium deficiency that
may have compromised the variable (impaired glucose toler-
ance, etc.). Few tests are available to specifically diagnose
chromium status. The glucose tolerance test has been most
commonly used to evaluate chromium deficiency. Table 6-1
lists signs of deficiency and excess.
Boron
Boron indirectly influences PTH activity, thus it influences cal-
cium, phosphorus, magnesium and cholecalciferol (vitamin
D3) metabolism. Investigators demonstrated that boron acts by
at least three different mechanisms (Hunt et al, 1994): 1) it
compensates for perturbations in energy substrate use induced
by vitamin D deficiency, 2) it enhances macromineral content
in normal bone and 3) it enhances some indices of growth and
cartilage maturation, independent of vitamin D. Boron has a
role in the control of urolithiasis. It decreases oxalate produc-
tion in women fed magnesium-deficient diets (Hunt et al,
1994a). Boron also decreases calcium loss and bone demineral-
ization in postmenopausal women (Nielsen et al, 1987). Table
6-1 lists signs of deficiency and excess.
VITAMINS
Definition
The term “vitamine” was coined by Casmir Funk in 1912 when
he described a class of nitrogen-containing compounds that
were “vital-amines” (i.e., being vital to life).This term was later
changed to vitamin when it was found that not all of these
compounds contained nitrogen. The discovery, isolation and
synthesis of vitamins have occurred in the last 100 years,
although the effects of vitamin deficiency, specifically scurvy,
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
122
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 121 ---
have been recorded since about 1150 B.C. (Combs, 1998).
A vitamin can be defined by its physical and physiologic
characteristics. For a substance to be classified as a vitamin, it
must have five basic characteristics: 1) it must be an organic
compound different from fat, protein and carbohydrate, 2) it
must be a component of the diet, 3) it must be essential in
minute amounts for normal physiologic function, 4) its
absence must cause a deficiency syndrome and 5) it must not
be synthesized in quantities sufficient to support normal phys-
iologic function.
These definitions are important to note because not all vita-
mins are essential for every species. For example, vitamin C is
essential for primates, guinea pigs and some species of fish, but
not for most other animal species. Lack of the enzyme L-
gulonolactone oxidase prevents those species from synthesizing
vitamin C from glucose, thereby, making vitamin C a required
vitamin. Under certain conditions of disease or increased
metabolism, however, vitamin C may be “conditionally essen-
tial” in those species that have de novo synthesis.
Two other terms warrant definition: vitamers and provita-
mins. A vitamer is chemically the same compound as a vitamin,
but may exert varying physiologic effects because it is an isomer.
Vitamin E is a good example of vitamers, because of its many
forms. α-tocopherol is the most biologically active form,
whereas γ-tocopherol has little biologic function, but acts as an
in vitro antioxidant. A provitamin is a compound that requires
an activation step before it becomes biologically active. β-
carotene, for example, is cleaved by enzymatic processes to
release two molecules of retinol (vitamin A).
The two main categories of vitamins are distinguished by
their miscibility in either lipids (fat soluble) or water (water
soluble). There are four fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K)
and nine generally recognized water-soluble vitamins (thi-
amin [B1], riboflavin [B2], niacin, pyridoxine [B6], pan-
tothenic acid, folic acid, cobalamin [B12], biotin and vitamin
C). Though not a true vitamin in the classic sense, choline is
generally added to commercial dog and cat foods and treated
as a vitamin in this chapter. The AAFCO dog food nutrient
profiles list three fat-soluble and eight water-soluble vitamins
including choline (vitamin K, biotin and vitamin C are not
listed). The AAFCO cat food nutrient profiles list four fat-
soluble and nine water-soluble vitamins including choline
(vitamin C is not listed) (2007). There are also a number of
compounds that are classified as “vitamin-like compounds”
or “quasi-vitamins,” which will also be discussed later in this
section.
Function
Vitamins have incredibly diverse physiologic functions.
Vitamins act as potentiators or cofactors in enzymatic reactions
(Figure 6-4). They also play a significant role in DNA synthe-
sis, energy release from nutrient substrates, bone development,
calcium homeostasis, normal eye function, cell membrane
integrity, blood clotting, free radical scavenging, amino acid and
protein metabolism and nerve impulse transduction (Table 6-3).
Because of the differences between fat and water solubility
and in chemical structure, vitamins are absorbed in the body
through a variety of means. Fat-soluble vitamins require bile
salts and fat to form micelles for absorption.They are then pas-
sively absorbed, usually in the duodenum and ileum, and trans-
ported in conjunction with chylomicrons to the liver via the
lymphatic system. In contrast, most of the water-soluble vita-
mins are absorbed via active transport. Some vitamins (e.g.,
cobalamin) require a carrier protein called “intrinsic factor”
whereas others need a sodium-dependent, carrier-mediated
absorption pump.
Deficiency/Adequacy/Toxicity
Similar to other essential trace or micronutrients, differences in
ingestion levels of vitamins create deficiency, adequacy or toxi-
city.The biologic dose-response curve (Figure 5-2) is appropri-
ate for vitamins (Box 5-5). A deficiency is a lack of the vitamin
in quantities required for normal physiologic function. In gen-
eral, fat-soluble vitamins are stored in the lipid depots of all tis-
sues, making them more resistant to deficiency, but also more
likely to cause toxicity. Conversely, water-soluble vitamins are
depleted at a faster rate because of limited storage; therefore,
they are less likely to cause toxicity and more likely to be acute-
ly deficient.
Within the range of adequate intake, requirements are met
for each lifestage and tissue stores are maximized. Consuming
more vitamins than is required to maximize stores can, in many
cases, lead to clinical signs of toxicity if the ingestion period is
prolonged and the body cannot excrete excesses. It is, therefore,
prudent to provide vitamins in the appropriate balance for each
lifestage to meet requirements and build tissue stores, but not
to over-supplement in the pharmaco-toxicologic range.
Factors Affecting Requirements
Different lifestages of animals affect vitamin requirements.
Growing and reproducing animals accrete tissues and therefore
require higher levels of vitamins, minerals, protein and energy
for optimal performance. Over-supplementation, however, is
still contraindicated because these animals are also more sus-
ceptible to toxicity. As animals age, metabolic and physiologic
changes may increase the requirement for some vitamins.
Various disease conditions also affect vitamin status.
Prolonged anorexia deprives animals of vitamins and other
nutrients and depletes vitamin stores. Polyuric diseases such as
diabetes mellitus and kidney disease may increase excretion of
water-soluble vitamins. Kidney disease can also lead to a sec-
ondary vitamin D deficiency by reducing the final hydroxyla-
tion step converting 25-OH-D3 to 1,25-(OH)2-D3, which
occurs in the proximal tubules of the kidneys.
In addition, certain drugs (e.g., antibiotics) may decrease the
intestinal microflora responsible for vitamin K synthesis. Also,
diuretic therapy may increase excretion of water-soluble vita-
mins. Some vitamin requirements depend on other nutrient
levels. The amount of cobalamin required is related to the
amount of folic acid, choline and methionine present because
these nutrients interact metabolically and are dependent on
each other. In addition, the amount of tryptophan influences
123
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 122 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
124
Table 6-3. Summary of names, functions and clinical syndromes associated with deficiency and toxicity of vitamins.
Vitamin
Function
Deficiency
Toxicity
Vitamin A
Component of visual proteins, 
Anorexia, retarded growth, poor coat, 
Cervical spondylosis (cats), tooth loss
(rhodopsin, iodopsin), differentiation 
weakness, xerophthalmia, nyctalopia, 
(cats), retarded growth, anorexia, 
of epithelial cells, spermatogenesis, 
increased CSF pressure, 
erythema, long-bone fractures
immune function, bone resorption
aspermatogenesis, fetal resorption
Vitamin D
Calcium and phosphorus homeostasis, 
Rickets, enlarged costochondral 
Hypercalcemia, calcinosis, anorexia, 
bone mineralization, bone resorption, 
junctions, osteomalacia, osteoporosis
lameness
insulin synthesis, immune function
Vitamin E
Biologic antioxidant, membrane 
Sterility (males), steatitis, dermatosis, 
Minimally toxic. Fat-soluble vitamin
integrity through free radical scavenging
immunodeficiency, anorexia, myopathy
antagonism, increased clotting time 
(reversed with vitamin K)
Vitamin K
Carboxylation of clotting proteins II 
Prolonged clotting time, 
Minimally toxic. Anemia (dogs)
(prothrombin), VII, IX, X and other 
hypoprothrombinemia, hemorrhage
proteins, cofactor of the bone protein 
osteocalcin
Thiamin (B1)
Component of thiamin pyrophosphate 
Anorexia, weight loss, ataxia, 
Decreased blood pressure, 
(TPP), cofactor in decarboxylase 
polyneuritis, ventriflexion (cats), 
bradycardia, respiratory arrhythmia
enzyme reactions in the TCA cycle, 
paresis (dogs), cardiac hypertrophy 
nervous system
(dogs), bradycardia
Riboflavin (B2)
Component of flavin adenine 
Retarded growth, ataxia, collapse 
Minimally toxic
dinucleotide (FAD) and flavin 
syndrome (dogs), dermatitis, purulent 
mononucleotide (FMN) coenzymes, 
ocular discharge, vomition, 
electron transport in oxidase and 
conjunctivitis, coma, corneal 
dehydrogenase enzymes
vascularization, bradycardia, 
fatty liver (cats)
Niacin
Component of nicotinamide-adenine 
Anorexia, diarrhea, retarded growth, 
Low toxicity. Bloody feces, 
dinucleotide (NAD) and adenine 
ulceration of soft palate and buccal 
convulsions
dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) 
mucosa, necrosis of the tongue (dogs), 
coenzymes, hydrogen donor/
reddened ulcerated tongue (cats), 
acceptor in energy-releasing 
cheilosis, uncontrolled drooling
dehydrogenase reactions
Pyridoxine (B6)
Coenzyme in amino acid reactions 
Anorexia, retarded growth, weight loss,
Low toxicity. Anorexia, ataxia (dogs) 
(transaminases and decarboxylases), 
microcytic hypochromic anemia, 
neurotransmitter synthesis, niacin 
convulsions, renal tubular atrophy, 
synthesis from tryptophan, heme 
calcium oxalate crystalluria
synthesis, taurine synthesis, 
carnitine synthesis
Pantothenic acid
Precursor to coenzyme A (CoA), 
Emaciation, fatty liver, depressed 
No toxicity established in dogs  
protein, fat and carbohydrate 
growth, decreased serum cholesterol 
and cats
metabolism in the TCA cycle, 
and total lipids, tachycardia, coma, 
cholesterol synthesis, triglyceride 
lowered antibody response
synthesis
Folic acid (folate)
Methionine synthesis from
Anorexia, weight loss, glossitis, 
Nontoxic
homocysteine (vitamin B12
leukopenia, hypochromic anemia, 
dependent), purine synthesis, 
increased clotting time, elevated 
DNA synthesis
plasma iron, megaloblastic anemia 
(cats), sulfa drugs interfere with gut 
synthesis, cancer drugs (methotrexate) 
are antagonistic
Biotin
Component of four carboxylase 
Hyperkeratosis, alopecia (cats), dry 
No toxicity established in dogs 
enzymes: pyruvate carboxylase, 
secretions around eyes, nose and 
and cats
acetyl-CoA carboxylase, 
mouth (cats), hypersalivation, 
propionyl-CoA carboxylase and 
anorexia, bloody diarrhea
3-methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase
Cobalamin (B12)
Coenzyme functions in propionate 
Cessation of growth (cats), 
Altered reflexes (reduction in vascular 
metabolism, aids tetrahydrofolate-
methylmalonic aciduria, anemia
conditioned reflexes and an 
containing enzymes in methionine 
exaggeration of unconditioned 
synthesis, leucine synthesis/degradation
reflexes)
Vitamin C
Cofactor in hydroxylase enzyme 
Liver synthesis precludes dietary 
No toxicity established in dogs 
reactions, synthesis of collagen 
requirement, no signs of deficiency 
and cats
proteins, synthesis of L-carnitine, 
have been described in normal 
enhances iron absorption, free radical 
cats and dogs
scavenging, antioxidant/pro-oxidant 
functionality
Choline
Component of phosphatidylcholine 
Fatty liver (puppies), increased blood 
None described for cats and dogs
found in membranes, neurotransmitter 
prothrombin times, thymic atrophy, 
acetylcholine, methyl group donor
decreased growth rate, anorexia, 
perilobular infiltration of the liver (cats)
L-carnitine*
Transport long-chain fatty acids into 
Hyperlipidemia, cardiomyopathy, 
None described for cats and dogs
the mitochondria for use in β-oxidation
muscle asthenia
*L-carnitine is a vitamin-like substance.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 123 ---
niacin requirements because tryptophan is the precursor for
that vitamin.
Finally, certain foods may contain antivitamin activity, for
example, thiaminases in tissues of some fresh water fish may
deactivate thiamin.
Feeding scientifically based formulas that specifically target
the lifestage, nutrient interaction and disease condition will
address changing vitamin requirements.
Vitamin Interactions
Much of the experimental work with vitamin deficiency disease
has focused on the deficiency of a single vitamin. However,
multiple deficiencies occur more frequently than a single-vita-
min deficiency in patients. Pellagra is a classic example, in
which deficiencies of niacin and tryptophan are usually accom-
panied by deficiencies of vitamin B6 and riboflavin.
Many critical pathways require the concerted action of sever-
al B-complex vitamins (Figure 6-4). For example, one of the
key reactions of metabolism is the conversion of pyruvate to
acetyl-CoA. It is a key reaction because it occurs at the inter-
section of glycolysis and the TCA cycle. This pathway point is
critical in the production of energy and the synthesis of fat and
protein. Four different vitamins (niacin, thiamin, pantothenic
acid and biotin) act as coenzymes in this one enzymatic conver-
sion. Thus, a deficiency of any one of these four vitamins com-
promises the efficiency of the other three.
125
Minerals and Vitamins
Figure 6-4. The role of B vitamins in intermediary metabolism.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 124 ---
The interactions between vitamins may involve the process-
es of absorption, metabolism, catabolism and excretion. Some
vitamins may spare the requirements of others, whereas others
may have potentially adverse effects. Even the marginal defi-
ciency of one vitamin can exacerbate a deficiency or increase the
requirement of another vitamin. Some examples of vitamin-
vitamin interactions appear in Table 6-4.
Availability
Estimating the vitamin content of foods and foodstuffs and
ultimately the adequacy of a given food is difficult at best
because of cumulative errors made in estimating vitamin con-
tent and availability.These errors include: 1) analytical errors in
sampling and determination of the vitamin, 2) variation in the
actual amount of the vitamin (e.g., lot-to-lot variation, season-
al effects, demographics, different cultivars), 3) the presence of
vitamins in bound forms in many foodstuffs and foods, 4) stor-
age losses and 5) processing losses. All of these factors make it
difficult to define what vitamin level is optimal for a given
lifestage and food. To account for potential errors, references
recommend that analytical values in databases be discounted by
10 to 25% (Combs, 1998).
Supplementation
Nearly all commercial pet foods contain added vitamins.
Formulating a ration to meet vitamin requirements entirely
from ingredient sources is extremely difficult and poses risks for
the animal. The body uses synthetic and naturally formed vita-
mins in the same way, although they may have different avail-
abilities. The effects of processing on vitamin stability and the
availability in conjunction with disputed requirement levels in
complex foods make fortification necessary (Chapter 8).
Commercial pet foods, therefore, are fortified to meet an ani-
mal’s vitamin requirement for a given lifestage, overcome pro-
cessing and storage losses and avoid toxicity. Because commer-
cial pet foods are fortified with vitamins, it is usually unneces-
sary, and perhaps contraindicated, to concurrently give multi-
purpose vitamin-mineral supplements. Supplementation may
be warranted in the management of diseases that affect vitamin
metabolism, but should be monitored if long-term treatment is
planned.
Fat-Soluble Vitamins
Vitamin A
Vitamin A is a general term describing a group of compounds
with the biologic activity of retinol. Carotenoids are provitamin
A. There are about 600 carotenoids known in nature, but only
about 10% (e.g., α-carotene, β-carotene and β-cryptoxanthin)
are provitamin A (Yeum and Russell, 2002). The international
unit (IU) is still used by the pet food industry to measure the
biologic activity of vitamin A. One IU of vitamin A activity can
be provided by 0.3 µg of all-trans-retinol. In people, 12 µg β-
carotene, 24 µg α-carotene or 24 µg β-cryptoxanthin is equal to
one retinol activity equivalent (1 µg retinol) (DRI, 2001). Dogs,
but not cats, can use provitamin A as a source of vitamin A.The
retinol equivalent of β-carotene in dogs has not been defined.
Most of the preformed vitamin A in food is in the form of
retinyl esters, whereas the source of vitamin A from plants is in
the form of provitamin A carotenoids.
FUNCTION
Vitamin A is essential for a number of distinct biologic func-
tions. It is necessary for normal vision, growth, reproduction,
immune function and maintenance of healthy epithelial tissue.
Vitamin A is also involved in the expression and regulation of
many genes (McClintick et al, 2005).
METABOLISM
Retinyl esters in food are hydrolyzed by hydrolases from the
pancreas and the mucosal brush border to yield retinol. Retinyl
esters and carotenoids are hydrophobic, thus their dispersion
into the aqueous environment of the small intestinal lumen
requires bile salts for micellar solubilization.This process allows
access of hydrolytic enzymes to retinyl esters and exposes
retinol to the mucosal surface, allowing free retinol and intact
β-carotene to diffuse passively into mucosal epithelial cells.
Absorption of vitamin A esters appears to be high (80 to 90%),
but absorption may vary depending on the level and type of
dietary fat and protein, which exert surfactant effects (Combs,
1998).
Dietary carotenoids are only absorbed half as well as pre-
formed dietary vitamin A. As the amount of carotenoids in the
food increases, however, the absorption efficiency decreases.
Intestinal absorption of carotenoids is much more critically
dependent on the presence of bile salts than is absorption of
vitamin A. Cats can absorb β-carotene but are unable to con-
vert it to retinol (Schweigert el al, 2002).
In the body, enzymes convert provitamin A carotenoids to
retinols. β,β-carotene 15,15’-monooxygenase is a central cleav-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
126
Table 6-4. Examples of vitamin-vitamin interactions.*
One vitamin needed for optimal absorption of another
Vitamin B6 for vitamin B12
Folate for thiamin
A high level of one vitamin may interfere with absorption
or metabolism of another
Vitamin E interferes with vitamin K
Vitamin B6 interferes with niacin
Thiamin interferes with riboflavin
One vitamin needed for metabolism of another
Riboflavin needed for vitamin B6 and niacin
Vitamin B6 needed for niacin
One vitamin protects against excess catabolism or urinary
losses of another
Vitamin C spares vitamin B6
One vitamin protects against oxidative destruction of
another
Vitamin E spares vitamin A
Vitamin C spares vitamin E
A high level of one vitamin can obscure the diagnosis of
deficiency of another
Folate deficiency obscures vitamin B12 deficiency
*Adapted from Machlin LJ, Langseth L. Vitamin-vitamin interac-
tions. In: Bodwell LE, Erdman JW Jr, eds. Nutrient Interactions.
New York, NY: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1988; 287-306.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 125 ---
age enzyme that cleaves β,β-carotene into two molecules of
retinol at the 15,15’ double bond. The gene encoding for the
enzyme has been cloned from several species including people,
mice and chicks (Wyss, 2004). This central cleavage enzyme is
found in the intestinal mucosa, liver, lungs, kidney, testes and
brain. Recently, a second type of cleavage enzyme, β,β-carotene
9’,10’-dioxygenase, was identified and cloned in mice (Kiefer et
al, 2001). This enzyme exclusively catalyzes the asymmetric
oxidative cleavage of β-carotene at the 9’,10’ double bond,
resulting in the formation of β-apo-10’-carotenal and β-
ionone.
Vitamin A is absorbed almost exclusively as the free alcohol
retinol. Within mucosal cells, retinol is re-esterified mostly to
palmitate and incorporated into the chylomicrons of the
mucosa. Afterwards, it diffuses into lymph. A small amount of
retinol may be oxidized first to retinal and then to retinoic acid,
which may form a compound (glucuronide) that passes into the
portal blood. Vitamin A is transported through the lymphatic
system with low-density lipoprotein (LDL) to the liver, where
it is deposited mainly in hepatocytes and stellate and parenchy-
mal cells.
Some vitamin A derivatives are re-excreted into the intestin-
al lumen via the bile. This is true for much of retinoic acid and
some retinol.The major vitamin A components of bile are vita-
min A glucuronides, many of which are reabsorbed. Thus,
enterohepatic circulation may provide an important means of
conserving vitamin A. Although dogs and cats excrete vitamin
A in urine, cats excrete a lesser amount.
When vitamin A is mobilized from the liver, stored vitamin
A ester is hydrolyzed before it is released into the bloodstream.
Vitamin A retinol is transported to tissues in the bloodstream
by a specific transport protein called retinol-binding protein
(RBP). RBP is synthesized and secreted by hepatic parenchy-
mal cells.
In contrast to most other species, dogs and cats have a unique
way of metabolizing vitamin A.Cats require preformed vitamin
A because they lack the oxygenase enzyme necessary for β-
carotene cleavage. In addition, studies have shown that cats and
dogs do not depend on RBP to transport vitamin A in plasma
(Schweigert, 1988; Wilson et al, 1987; Schweigert et al, 1990;
Schweigert et al, 1990a). Cats and dogs transport vitamin A as
retinyl esters (mostly retinyl stearate) bound to LDL and very
low-density lipoprotein in amounts 10 to 50 times those of
other mammals (Schweigert, 1988). This is of interest because
free circulating retinyl esters are a sign of hypervitaminosis A in
almost all other animal species, including people.
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) recommended allowance for vitamin A
is 5,000 IU/kg DM for dogs for all lifestages (growth, repro-
duction and maintenance) and 9,000 IU/kg DM for cats for
growth and reproduction and 5,000 IU/kg DM for mainte-
nance. NRC (2006) recommends a vitamin A allowance of
1,515 RE (retinal equivalent) (5,050 IU)/kg DM for dogs for
all lifestages, 1,000 RE (3,333 IU)/kg DM for cats for growth
and maintenance and 2,000 RE (6,667 IU)/kg DM for cats
during gestation and lactation. Unlike dogs, cats cannot meet
their vitamin A requirement from carotenoids.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
The appreciable stores of vitamin A in the body are mobi-
lized as needed to mitigate against the effects of low dietary
intakes of the vitamin.The only unequivocal signs of vitamin A
deficiency are the ocular lesions nyctalopia (night blindness)
and xerophthalmia (extreme dryness of the conjunctiva). Other
signs include anorexia, weight loss, ataxia, skin lesions,
increased susceptibility to infection, retinal degeneration, poor
coat, weakness, increased cerebrospinal fluid pressure, nephritis,
skeletal defects (periosteal overgrowth and narrowing of foram-
ina) and impaired reproduction (NRC, 2006).
Vitamin A toxicities have been encountered in numerous
species.The most characteristic signs of hypervitaminosis A are
skeletal malformation, spontaneous fractures and internal hem-
orrhage (Case 6-5). Other signs include anorexia, slow growth,
weight loss, skin thickening, suppressed keratinization,
increased blood clotting time, reduced erythrocyte count,
enteritis, congenital abnormalities, conjunctivitis, fatty infiltra-
tion of the liver and reduced function of liver and kidneys.
Queens fed a diet with 606,000 RE/kg food had an increased
number of kittens born with defects such as cleft palate, cran-
ioschisis, foreshortened mandible, stenotic colon, enlarged
heart and agenesis of the spinal cord and small intestine
(Freytag et al, 2003). Dogs seem less sensitive to excess dietary
vitamin A than some other mammals (Cline et al, 1997).
The dietary maximum of vitamin A in the AAFCO (2007)
dog and cat nutrient profiles is 250,000 IU/kg DM for dogs
and 750,000 IU/kg DM for cats. NRC (2006) proposed a safe
upper limit of 15,000 RE (50,000 IU)/kg DM for growing
puppies and gestating and lactating bitches, and 64,000 RE
(213,333 IU)/kg DM for adult dogs. The safe upper limit of
vitamin A for cats is 80,000 RE (266,667 IU)/kg DM for
growth and 100,000 RE (333,333 IU)/kg DM for mainte-
nance, gestation and lactation.
SOURCES
Naturally rich sources of vitamin A include fish oil, liver, egg
and dairy products.The most common vitamin A supplements
used in pet foods include vitamin A esters (all trans retinyl
palmitate, acetate or propionate) or vitamin A provided as fish
oils. Because of stability issues, vitamin A sources are often
coated, beaded, prilled or spray dried with antioxidants and
emulsifying agents.
Concentrations of carotenoids in plants vary widely accord-
ing to geographic location, maturity, method of harvest,
amount and type of processing, length and conditions of stor-
age and exposure to high temperature, sunlight and air. As a
result, vitamin A is among the most variable nutrients in the
diet. The vitamin A content in animal tissues can also be vari-
able; concentrations can be very high in certain tissues such as
liver. Levels of vitamin A in animal tissue vary depending on
either the level of vitamin A or carotenoid present in the dog’s
or cat’s diet.
127
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 126 ---
Vitamin D
Two important forms of vitamin D are cholecalciferol (vitamin
D3), which occurs in animals and ergocalciferol (vitamin D2),
which occurs predominantly in plants. In pet food, vitamin D
activity is typically expressed in IU. One IU of vitamin D can
be provided by 0.025 µg of cholecalciferol or vitamin D3. The
skin of most mammals can produce cholecalciferol from the
provitamin 7-dehydrocholesterol via activation with ultraviolet-
B light. However, this photosynthesis pathway is inefficient in
dogs (Hazewinkel et al, 1987) and cats (Morris, 1999) because
of the higher activity of the enzyme 7-dehydrocholesterol- ∆7
reductase that converts 7-dehydrocholesterol to cholesterol.
Therefore, dogs and cats need dietary vitamin D.
FUNCTION
The primary function of vitamin D is to enhance intestin-
al absorption and mobilization, as well as retention and bone
deposition of calcium and phosphorus. This function is man-
ifested through its active form of 1,25-(OH)2-D3 as a hor-
mone that binds to the nuclear 1,25-(OH)2-D3 receptor
(VDR) in many types of cells. The active vitamin D3 also has
a direct effect on Ca2+ channels located on the plasma mem-
brane (Norman et al, 1992).
METABOLISM
Vitamin D is absorbed from the small intestine by nonsat-
urable, passive diffusion, which depends on bile salts. Vitamin
D then enters the lymphatic circulation primarily (~90%) in
association with chylomicrons; the remainder of vitamin D is
associated with an α-globulin fraction (Combs, 1998). Like
other steroids, vitamin D is transported in association with pro-
teins. In most species, the binding protein is vitamin D-bind-
ing protein (DBP) or “transcalciferin.” The concentration of
DBP greatly exceeds the concentration of vitamin D metabo-
lites in blood. This concentration difference, in conjunction
with the binding affinity, results in less than 5% of the available
binding sites being occupied by vitamin D compounds. The
distribution between bound and free vitamin D compounds
greatly favors the bound form. In this fashion, DBP facilitates
peripheral distribution of vitamin D from dietary origin and
mobilizes endogenously produced vitamin D from the skin.
Vitamin D is distributed relatively evenly among the various
tissues where it resides in lipid depots. Vitamin D can be found
in adipose, kidneys, liver, lungs, aorta and heart. The primary
circulating form of vitamin D is the parent vitamin D (~50%),
with the next most abundant form (i.e.,25-OH-D3 [also called
calcidiol]) accounting for approximately 20% of the total
(Combs, 1998).
In mammals, both vitamin D2 and D3 are not the active
form of vitamin D. They are activated in the body by hydrox-
ylation to 25-OH-D3 first in the liver and again to 1,25-
(OH)2-D3 (also called calcitriol) in the kidneys. Vitamin D2
is less efficiently used than vitamin D3 in cats (Morris, 2002).
At normal plasma concentrations, only small amounts of 25-
OH-D3 are released from this pool to enter tissues.Thus, cir-
culating levels of 1,25-(OH)2-D3 are a good indicator of
vitamin D status.
Several factors tightly regulate the vitamin D endocrine sys-
tem: 1,25-(OH)2-D3, PTH, calcitonin, several other hor-
mones and circulating levels of calcium and phosphate. The
vitamin D-dependent homeostatic system responds to pertur-
bations in calcium concentration. For example, when serum
calcium falls below a given level, PTH is secreted by the
parathyroid glands, which function to detect hypocalcemia.
The kidney responds to PTH, resulting in phosphate diuresis
and stimulation of 25-OH-D3 1-hydroxylase.The latter effect
increases production of 1,25-(OH)2-D3, which acts to
increase enteric absorption of calcium and phosphate. In addi-
tion, 1,25-(OH)2-D3 acts jointly with PTH in bone to pro-
mote mobilization of calcium and phosphate. The combined
result of these responses is to increase plasma concentration of
calcium and phosphate. Calcitonin is secreted by the thyroid
gland (“C” cells) when circulating concentrations of calcium
are increased. Calcitonin suppresses bone mobilization and
may increase the renal excretion of calcium and phosphate. In
that situation, 25-OH-D3 1-hydroxylase may be inhibited by
1,25-(OH)2-D3, and may actually be converted to 24,25-
(OH)2-D3, which may down-regulate the absorption of calci-
um in dogs (Tryfonidou et al, 2002).
These events tightly regulate hydroxylase activity and main-
tain nearly constant plasma concentrations of 1,25-(OH)2-D3,
calcium and phosphorus. Once formed, 1,25-(OH)2-D3 binds
to specific receptors on the enterocyte nucleus and initiates
events that stimulate calcium and phosphorus absorption. In
addition, 1,25-(OH)2-D3, acting with PTH, mediates resorp-
tion of bone with the release of calcium and phosphorus.
Many metabolites of vitamin D circulate in plasma other
than 25-OH-D3 and 1,25-(OH)2-D3. One metabolite,
24,25-(OH)2-D3, may also be biologically active, whereas
other metabolites are generally considered physiologically inac-
tive excretory forms (Combs, 1998).
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) dietary allowance for vitamin D is 500
IU/kg DM for dogs for all lifestages. For cats, the AAFCO
(2007) allowance is 750 IU/kg DM for growth and reproduc-
tion and 500 IU/kg DM for maintenance. The vitamin D
allowance recommended by NRC (2006) is 13.8 µg cholecal-
ciferol (552 IU)/kg DM for dogs regardless of lifestage. The
NRC recommended vitamin D allowance for cats is 5.6 µg
cholecalciferol (250 IU)/kg DM for growth and 7 µg cholecal-
ciferol (280 IU)/kg DM for maintenance and reproduction.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Signs of vitamin D deficiency are frequently confounded by
a simultaneous deficiency or imbalance of calcium and phos-
phorus. Clinical signs generally include rickets (young ani-
mals), enlarged costochondral junctions, osteomalacia (adult
animals), osteoporosis (adult animals) and decreased serum cal-
cium and inorganic phosphorus concentrations. Experimental
vitamin D deficiency has been produced in cats, resulting in
neurologic abnormalities associated with degeneration of the
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
128
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 127 ---
cervical spinal cord (Morris, 1996). Other signs included
hypocalcemia, elevated PTH concentrations, posterior paraly-
sis, ataxia and eventual quadriparesis.
Excessive intake of vitamin D is associated with increases in
25-OH-D3, with the D3 form being more toxic than the D2
form. When circulating at very high concentrations, 25-OH-
D3 can compete effectively with 1,25-(OH)2-D3 for receptors
in the intestine and bone. Therefore, during vitamin D toxico-
sis, 25-OH-D3 can induce actions usually attributed to 1,25-
(OH)2-D3.Thus, 25-OH-D3 is believed to be the critical fac-
tor in vitamin D intoxication (NRC, 1987). Excessive vitamin
D3 supplementation below the toxic level decreases bone
remodeling and causes focal enlargement of the growth plate in
growing puppies (Tryfonidou et al, 2003). Excessive vitamin D
concentrations may result in hypercalcemia, soft-tissue calcifi-
cation and ultimately death (Morita et al, 1995; Nakamura et
al, 2004) (Case 6-6).
The vitamin D maximum in the AAFCO (2007) dog and
cat nutrient profiles is 5,000 IU/kg DM for dogs and 10,000
IU/kg DM for cats. The NRC (2006) proposed a safe upper
limit of 80 µg cholecalciferol (3,200 IU)/kg DM for dogs and
750 µg cholecalciferol (30,000 IU)/kg DM for cats regardless
of lifestages.
SOURCES
Marine fish and fish oils are the richest natural sources of
vitamin D in foodstuffs but they may pose a risk for toxicity.
One group of investigators found that moist foods generally
contained higher levels of vitamin D than extruded foods and
that some moist foods exceeded the AAFCO maximal recom-
mended allowance of 10,000 IU/kg for cats (Morris, 1996).
Other sources of vitamin D include fresh water fish and eggs
(especially yolks). Beef, liver and dairy products contain small-
er amounts of vitamin D. The most common synthetic sources
of vitamin D in pet foods include cholecalciferol (D-activated
animal sterol), vitamin D3 supplement, ergocalciferol (D-acti-
vated plant sterol) and vitamin D2 supplement.
Vitamin E
Vitamin E is a term for a group of compounds with the biolog-
ic activity of α-tocopherol. In nature, there are eight isomeric
forms of vitamin E, four tocopherols (α, β, γ, δ) and four
tocotrienols (α, β, γ, δ). Naturally occurring α-tocopherol (d-α-
tocopherol) is now designated as RRR-α-tocopherol based on
RS or CIP system of chiral configuration. Synthetic α-toco-
pherol (dl-α-tocopherol),a mixture of eight stereoisomers of α-
tocopherol, is designated as all-rac (racemic)-α-tocopherol.
Vitamin E activity in pet food is generally expressed in interna-
tional units. One IU of vitamin E equals 1 mg of all-rac-α-
tocopheryl acetate or 0.91 mg of all-rac-α-tocopherol. The
most biopotent form of vitamin E is α-tocopherol.The relative
biopotencies of vitamin E isomers are as follows: α >β >δ >γ
(McDowell, 1989). Also, tocopherols are generally more avail-
able than tocotrienols (Combs, 1998). Because some forms of
vitamin E have little biologic activity, total vitamin E analysis is
not a reliable means of determining vitamin E activity.
FUNCTION
Vitamin E functions as an antioxidant in the body and in
food. Of the vitamin E isomers, α-tocopherol is the most active
biologic form in the body, whereas the γ-isomer is the most
active form in food. Mixed tocopherols, including γ-toco-
pherols, are widely used to prevent lipid oxidation in pet food
products (Chapter 8).
Vitamin E works in conjunction with glutathione peroxidase
to protect cells against the adverse effects of reactive oxygen and
other free radicals that initiate the oxidation of polyunsaturated
membrane phospholipids. Vitamin E in cellular and subcellu-
lar membranes is the first line of defense against peroxidation
of vital phospholipids. However, some peroxides are formed
even when adequate levels of vitamin E are present.
Selenium, as part of the enzyme glutathione peroxidase, is a
second line of defense that destroys peroxides before they dam-
age membranes. Therefore, selenium, vitamin E and sulfur-
containing amino acids, through different biochemical mecha-
nisms, are capable of preventing some of the same nutritional
diseases (McDowell, 1992). Vitamin E prevents fatty acid
hydroperoxide formation, sulfur-containing amino acids are
precursors of glutathione peroxidase and selenium is a compo-
nent of glutathione peroxidase. In addition, vitamin E is impor-
tant for normal reproduction and is involved in modulating cel-
lular signaling, regulating gene transcription, modulating
immune function and inducing apoptosis (Brigelius-Flohe et
al, 2002).
METABOLISM
Vitamin E is absorbed from the small intestine by nonsat-
urable, passive diffusion, which depends on micellar solubiliza-
tion. Whether presented as free alcohol or as esters, most vita-
min E is absorbed as the alcohol. Esters are largely hydrolyzed
in the gut wall before absorption, probably by a duodenal
mucosal esterase. The free alcohol enters the intestinal lacteals
and is transported via lymph to the general circulation.
The efficiency of vitamin E absorption is low and variable
(35 to 50%); the absorption efficiency is much lower than that
of vitamin A (Combs, 1998). Absorption of vitamin E is
enhanced by the simultaneous digestion and absorption of
dietary lipids. Transfer of vitamin E across epithelial cells may
require several stages, most of them poorly understood. In
mammals, vitamin E is transported from the intestine to lym-
phatic capillaries in association with chylomicrons. Conversely,
in birds, tocopherol is transported via the portal vein directly to
the liver. Unlike cholesterol or vitamin A, α-tocopherol is not
re-esterified during the absorption process.
Vitamin E circulates in the lymph and blood bound to all
of the lipoproteins. There is a very high correlation between
tocopherol levels and the total lipid or cholesterol concentra-
tion in serum.
All tissues show linear increases in tocopherol concentrations
with increases in tocopherol intake. This relationship differs
from that of most other vitamins, which usually have distinct
deposition thresholds in tissues other than the liver, and may
provide an explanation for the pharmacologic effects of vitamin
129
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 128 ---
E. Vitamin E levels in tissues vary markedly with no consistent
relationship to lipid parameters. The vitamin is most concen-
trated in membrane-rich cell fractions such as mitochondria
and microsomes.
Vitamin E undergoes very little metabolism. Usually less than
1% of orally ingested vitamin E is excreted in urine (Combs,
1998). The major route of excretion is fecal elimination.
The need for vitamin E in the diet is markedly influenced by
dietary composition.The requirement increases with increasing
levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), oxidizing agents,
vitamin A, carotenoids and trace minerals and decreases with
increasing levels of fat-soluble antioxidants, sulfur-containing
amino acids and selenium. Various researchers have recom-
mended up to 60 mg of α-tocopherol per g of PUFA; howev-
er, there is no consensus among experts about the quantitation
of this relationship (Combs, 1998).
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) recommended allowance for vitamin E
is 50 IU/kg DM for dogs and 30 IU/kg DM for cats, irrespec-
tive of the lifestage. For cat foods containing fish oils, AAFCO
recommends an additional 10 IU vitamin E/g of fish oil/kg of
food above the allowance. The vitamin E allowance recom-
mended by NRC (2006) is 30 mg α-tocopherol (33 IU)/kg
DM for dogs for all lifestages. For cats, the vitamin E allowance
is 38 mg α-tocopherol (42 IU)/kg DM for growth and main-
tenance and 31 mg α-tocopherol (34 IU)/kg DM for gestation
and lactation.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
The clinical manifestations of vitamin E deficiency vary
markedly between species. In general, however, the neuromus-
cular, vascular and reproductive systems are affected most com-
monly. Signs of vitamin E deficiency are mostly attributed to
membrane dysfunction as a result of the oxidative degradation
of polyunsaturated membrane phospholipids and disruption of
other critical cellular processes. Clinical findings of vitamin E
deficiency in dogs include degenerative skeletal muscle disease
associated with muscle weakness, degeneration of testicular
germinal epithelium and impaired spermatogenesis, failure of
gestation, brown pigmentation (lipofuscinosis) of intestinal
smooth muscle and decreased plasma tocopherol concentra-
tions. In cats, deficiency signs include steatitis, focal interstitial
myocarditis, focal myositis of skeletal muscle and periportal
mononuclear infiltration in the liver (Case 6-7).
Vitamin E is one of the least toxic fat-soluble vitamins.
Animals and people apparently tolerate high levels without
adverse effects. However, at very high doses, antagonism with
other fat-soluble vitamins may occur, resulting in impaired
bone mineralization, reduced hepatic storage of vitamin A and
coagulopathies as a result of decreasing absorption of vitamins
D, A and K, respectively. A maximum of 1,000 IU/kg DM was
recommended by AAFCO for dogs; however, AAFCO (2007)
set no maximum for cats. There is no evidence of vitamin E
toxicity in dogs and very limited information when vitamin E
is given orally to cats. In certain conditions, higher dietary vita-
min E levels may be beneficial (Morris and Rogers, 1994). A
number of inflammatory dermatoses in animals have been
treated with oral vitamin (Chapter 32). People have been given
much higher dietary concentrations of vitamin E without
adverse clinical signs (Combs, 1998).
SOURCES
Only plants synthesize vitamin E.The richest sources of vita-
min E are vegetable oils and, to a lesser extent, seeds and cereal
grains. Tocopherol concentrations are highest in green leaves.
Tocotrienols are not found in green leaves, but instead are found
in the bran and germ fractions of certain plants. Animal tissues
tend to be low in vitamin E, with the highest levels occurring in
fatty tissues. Common vitamin E supplements used in pet foods
include α-tocopherol and α-tocopherol acetate.
Vitamin K
Like other fat-soluble vitamins, vitamin K is a generic descrip-
tor for a group of compounds exhibiting the antihemorrhagic
activity of phylloquinone. Phylloquinone (vitamin K1) and
menaquinone (vitamin K2) are the two major naturally occur-
ring forms of vitamin K. Green leafy vegetables are the primary
sources of vitamin K1 whereas vitamin K2 is produced from
actinomycete bacteria found in normal intestinal microflora.
Vitamin K2 is now called menaquinone-7 (MK-7) in recogni-
tion of the seven-isoprenoid units. Menadione or vitamin K3
(2-methyl-1,4-napthoquinone) is the parent compound of the
vitamin K series. When used in pet food, it is usually added in
a complex form such as menadione sodium bisulfate complex
(MSBC) or menadione dimethylpyrimidinol bisulfate (MPB),
as the bioactive form of vitamin K.
FUNCTION
Vitamin K plays a major role in the carboxylation of proteins
(factors II, VII, IX, X and proteins C and S) to convert pro-
thrombin to thrombin for normal blood clotting. Vitamin K is
also involved in the synthesis of osteocalcin, a protein that reg-
ulates the incorporation of calcium phosphates in growing bone
(Combs, 1998).
METABOLISM
The absorption of natural vitamin K in food is between 40
and 70% (Combs, 1998). Ingested phylloquinone is absorbed
from the proximal small intestine into the lymphatic system by
an energy-dependent process. Menaquinone is absorbed from
the small intestine by a passive noncarrier-mediated process.
Conditions that impair lipid absorption also adversely affect
vitamin K absorption. Upon absorption, vitamin K is transport-
ed to the liver in chylomicrons. The vitamin is rapidly concen-
trated in the liver, but in contrast to other fat-soluble vitamins,
vitamin K has a very rapid turnover in this organ. No specific
carriers have been identified for any of the K vitamers.
Although phylloquinones and menaquinones are ingested,
much of the vitamin K in tissues is from bacterial origin.
Menadione is rapidly excreted in urine as the phosphate, sulfate
or glucuronide form of menadiol. However, catabolism of phyl-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
130
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 129 ---
loquinones and menaquinones is much slower than that of
menadione and they are primarily excreted in feces as a glu-
curonide conjugate.
Because microbially synthesized K2 is readily absorbed by
passive diffusion in the colon in most mammalian species,
dietary supplementation is unnecessary for most cats and dogs.
REQUIREMENTS
AAFCO (2007) does not have a recommended allowance for
vitamin K for dogs, but recommends 0.1 mg/kg DM for cats
when cat foods contain more than 25% fish. This recommen-
dation is warranted because vitamin K deficiency has been
observed in cats fed certain commercial foods containing high
levels of salmon or tuna (Case 6-8). NRC (2006) recommends
that the vitamin K allowance is 1 mg/kg DM for cats for all
lifestages. For dogs, the recommended allowance of vitamin K
is 1.64 mg/kg DM for growth, 1.63 mg/kg DM for mainte-
nance and 1.6 mg/kg DM for gestation and lactation.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Prolonged clotting times and excessive bleeding have been
reported in vitamin K deficiency in cats and dogs under vari-
ous conditions. Vitamin K deficiency usually occurs second-
ary to other conditions such as malabsorptive diseases
(inflammatory bowel disease), ingestion of coagulant antago-
nists (coumarin, indanedione), destruction of gut microflora
by antibiotic therapy (sulfonamides and broad-spectrum
antibiotics) and congenital defects (γ-glutamyl carboxylase
defect in Devon Rex breed of cats). Vitamin K3 (menadione)
has lower lipid solubility and is the most effective form of
vitamin K for cases of malabsorption. Vitamin K1 is the only
form of vitamin K effective in anticoagulant antagonism
(Edwards and Russell, 1987).
Phylloquinone produces no adverse effects when adminis-
tered to animals in massive doses by any route (NRC, 1987).
The menaquinones are similarly thought to have negligible
toxicity. Menadione, however, can produce fatal anemia, hyper-
bilirubinemia and severe jaundice. The intoxicating doses
appear to be at least three orders of magnitude above those lev-
els required for normal physiologic function (Combs, 1998).
Neither AAFCO nor NRC has set maximum or safe upper
limits for dogs and cats.
SOURCES
Data for vitamin K content of foods are limited by the lack
of good analytical methods. Nevertheless,because dietary needs
for vitamin K are low, most foods contribute significantly to
those needs. Rich sources of vitamin K include alfalfa meal,
oilseed meals, liver and fish meals. Menadione sodium bisulfite
complex and menadione dimethypyrimidinol bisulfate are
commonly used as vitamin K sources in pet food because of
their stability during manufacturing and storage.
Water-Soluble Vitamins
Deficiency of B vitamins occurs in veterinary medicine but may
be difficult to specifically diagnose because analytical tests are
not readily available. Therefore, diagnosis relies almost entirely
upon clinical signs and nutrient intake history.
B vitamins are relatively nontoxic and may be supplied to vet-
erinarians in individual or combination forms. Because many of
the B-vitamin deficiencies present with overlapping clinical
signs, it may be prudent to treat deficiency with vitamin-B
complex. If signs are specific for a particular B-vitamin defi-
ciency, and if the single preparation form of the vitamin is avail-
able, individual targeted treatment may be initiated. However,
individual preparations of B vitamins are often more expensive,
and the relative nontoxic levels of B vitamins warrant treatment
with the combination form.
Thiamin
Thiamin or vitamin B1 consists of one pyrimidine ring and one
thiazole ring linked via a methylene group. Thiamin may exist
as free thiamin or in the mono-, di-(pyro), or triphosphate con-
figuration. Thiamin pyrophosphate (80%) is the major form
found in tissues; the other three forms are found in lesser
amounts (Rindi, 1996; Brody, 1994a). Thiamin is very labile,
especially in wet foods, being susceptible to neutral and alkaline
conditions, heat, oxidation and ionizing radiation.
FUNCTION
Thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP) is the major coenzymatic
form of thiamin and is required for only a small number of enzy-
matic reactions.TPP is involved in the following general scheme
of reactions: 1) nonoxidative decarboxylation of α-ketoacids, 2)
oxidative decarboxylation of α-ketoacids and 3) transketolation
reactions. Thiamin may also have a function unrelated to coen-
zyme activity. TPP is concentrated in neuronal cells and may
affect chloride permeability by controlling the number of func-
tional channels, possibly by phosphorylation.
METABOLISM
Dietary thiamin may be present in any of the four forms
mentioned above or may be of synthetic origin. Whatever the
form, thiamin is hydrolyzed to free thiamin by intestinal phos-
phatases before absorption by enterocytes. Absorption takes
place primarily in the jejunum by an active, carrier-mediated
transport that also phosphorylates the vitamin. Passive diffu-
sion becomes an important mode of absorption when dietary
thiamin intake is high.
Absorbed thiamin is transported in erythrocytes, which con-
tain free thiamin and its phosphorylated forms, and in plasma,
which only contains free thiamin and its monophosphate form.
Tissues take up thiamin and may interconvert it between any of
its four forms. The liver, heart and kidneys have the highest
concentration of thiamin.
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) recommended allowance for thiamin is
1 mg/kg DM for dogs and 5 mg/kg DM for cats, irrespective
of the lifestage. NRC (2006) recommends a thiamin allowance
for dogs of 1.38 mg/kg DM for growth and 2.25 mg/kg DM
for maintenance and reproduction. For cats, the NRC (2006)
131
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 130 ---
recommended allowance for thiamin is 5.5 mg/kg DM for
growth, 5.6 mg/kg DM for maintenance and 6.3 mg/kg DM
for gestation and lactation. Table 6-5 lists AAFCO and NRC
allowances for dogs and cats.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Clinical thiamin deficiency is rarely observed in dogs and
cats because most commercial pet foods have adequate sup-
plementation. Signs of thiamin deficiency are often related to
the nervous system and heart. They include anorexia, failure
to grow, muscle weakness, paraparesis, convulsions, seizures,
ventriflexion of the head, ataxia and cardiac hypertrophy
(Read and Harrington, 1981; Jubb et al, 1956; Everett, 1944).
Thiamin deficiency may result from inadequate intake of
thiamin, attributable to foods with low-thiamin content or
processing losses, or high intake of thiamin antagonists. The
processing conditions used to prepare commercial pet foods
are destructive to thiamin. However, this anticipated loss is
overcome by adding synthetic thiamin before processing
(Case 6-9).
Thiamin antagonists may be synthetic or natural compounds
that modify the thiamin structure rendering it inactive. The
natural antagonists include thiaminases (enzymes that degrade
thiamin), and polyhydroxyphenols (caffeic acid, chlorogenic
acid, tannins), which inactivate thiamin by an oxyreductive
process. Thiaminases are found in high concentrations in raw
fish, shellfish, bacteria, yeast and fungi (Table 6-6). Cooking
destroys thiaminases.
Thiamin deficiency may be diagnosed by measuring erythro-
cyte transketolase activity or thiamin metabolites in blood
directly. Table 6-5 lists concentrations of thiamin in blood for
cats and dogs (Baker et al, 1986). Activity of erythrocyte trans-
ketolase is an excellent indicator of thiamin status, if deter-
mined in a laboratory familiar with the analysis. Thiamin toxi-
cosis via the oral route is very rare.
SOURCES
Thiamin occurs in animal tissues almost entirely in phospho-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
132
Table 6-5. Blood levels, allowances and tests for B-complex vitamins in cats and dogs.
Cats
AAFCO 
NRC 
Vitamin
Blood level
allowance*
allowance*
Best test
Thiamin
20-90 ng/ml (WB)
5 mg/kg
5.6 mg/kg
Erythrocyte transketolase activity
Riboflavin
196-660 ng/ml (WB)
4 mg/kg
4 mg/kg
Erythrocyte glutathione reductase**
Urine riboflavin
Niacin
1.8-5.8 µg/ml (WB)
60 mg/kg
40 mg/kg
Urine methyl nicotinamide or methyl-pyridones**
Pantothenic acid
104-270 ng/ml (WB)
5.0 mg/kg
5.75 mg/kg
Urinary excretion of pantothenate
Pyridoxine
86-350 ng/ml (P)
4.0 mg/kg
2.5 mg/kg
Blood levels of pyridoxine
Urinary metabolites of pathway intermediates
Folic acid
3.2-34 ng/ml (P)
0.8 mg/kg
0.75 µg/kg
Serum folate
Vitamin B12
120-1,200 pg/ml (WB)
20 µg/kg
22.5 µg/kg
Blood levels of cobalamin
Serum and urine methylmalonic acid
Biotin
1,000-3,000 pg/ml (WB)
70 µg/kg
75 µg/kg
Urinary biotin
Urinary organic acids
Choline
180-490 µg/ml (P)
2,400 mg/kg
2,550 mg/kg
Plasma choline and phosphatidylcholine
Dogs
AAFCO 
NRC 
Vitamin
Blood level
allowance*
allowance*
Best test
Thiamin
46-112 ng/ml (WB)
1.0 mg/kg
2.25 mg/kg
Erythrocyte transketolase activity
Riboflavin
185-420 ng/ml (WB)
2.2 mg/kg***
5.25 mg/kg
Erythrocyte glutathione reductase**
Urine riboflavin
Niacin
2.7-12 µg/ml (WB)
11.4 mg/kg
17 mg/kg
Urine methyl nicotinamide or methyl-pyridones**
Pantothenic acid
120-380 ng/ml (WB)
10 mg/kg
15 mg/kg
Urinary excretion of pantothenate
Pyridoxine
40-270 ng/ml (P)
1 mg/kg
1.5 mg/kg
Blood levels of pyridoxine
Urinary metabolites of pathway intermediates
Folic acid
4-26 ng/ml (P)
0.18 mg/kg
0.27 mg/kg
Serum folate
Vitamin B12
135-950 pg/ml (WB)
22 µg/kg
35 µg/kg
Holotranscobalamin II**
Biotin
530-5,000 pg/ml (WB)
None established
0†
Urinary biotin
Urinary organic acids
Choline
235-800 µg/ml (P)
1,200 mg/kg
1,700 mg/kg
Plasma choline and phosphatidylcholine
Key: WB = whole blood, P = plasma, AAFCO = Association of American Feed Control Officials, NRC = National Research Council.
*AAFCO allowances are similar for growth and adult maintenance and are expressed on dry matter basis (AAFCO Official Publication,
2007). NRC allowances are “recommended allowances” for adult maintenance and are also expressed on a dry matter basis (NRC.
Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and Cats. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006.
**Not currently available in veterinary medicine.
***Investigators have shown a riboflavin requirement approximately 20 to 33% higher than the AAFCO allowance listed here. (Cline JL,
Odle J, Easter RA. The riboflavin requirement of adult dogs at maintenance is greater than previous estimates. Journal of Nutrition 1996;
126: 984-988.)
†For normal foods not containing raw egg whites, adequate biotin is probably provided by intestinal microbial synthesis (assuming the
patient is not receiving antimicrobial therapy).
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 131 ---
rylated forms, whereas it occurs mostly as free thiamin in plants.
Thiamin is widely distributed in foods, but is mostly present at
low concentrations. The richest sources are whole grains, yeast
and liver (especially pork liver). Meat products may also supply
significant amounts of thiamin. Up to 90% of thiamin in natu-
ral ingredients may be lost as a result of processing (Morris and
Rogers, 1994). Therefore, thiamin supplementation is common
in pet foods. Thiamin hydrochloride and thiamin mononitrate
are the most commonly used supplements in commercial foods
for dogs and cats.
Riboflavin
Riboflavin, or vitamin B2 belongs to the class of isoalloxazines.
Riboflavin has a planar structure and has limited solubility in
water. This property has clinical significance because it is diffi-
cult to deliver massive doses of the vitamin via intravenous
solutions. Riboflavin is heat stabile, but sensitive to light, and
acidic and alkaline conditions.
FUNCTION
Riboflavin is the precursor to a group of enzymatic cofactors
called flavins. Flavins linked to protein are called flavoproteins.
The two major coenzymes derived from riboflavin are flavin
mononucleotide (FMN) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD).
Flavins are used as coenzymes in about 50 enzymes in mammals.
Flavins participate in intermediary energy metabolism and func-
tion mainly in oxidoreductase types of reactions (Figure 6-4).
METABOLISM
Most riboflavin found in food sources is in the form of free
coenzyme derivatives that are not readily absorbed unless
hydrolyzed, and covalently bound riboflavin that is not well
used. The free flavin compounds are hydrolyzed before they
are absorbed in the upper GI tract. A specialized transport
system that is saturable and sodium dependent is necessary
for absorption of flavins. After absorption, about 50% of the
riboflavin in blood is bound to albumin and the other half to
globulins (Brody, 1994a; Rivlin, 1996). Tissues requiring
riboflavin convert it to FMN by phosphorylation catalyzed by
flavokinase and subsequently to FAD catalyzed by FAD syn-
thase. Excess riboflavin in the body is eliminated largely as
riboflavin via the kidneys.
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) recomended allowance for riboflavin is
2.2 mg/kg DM for dogs and 4 mg/kg DM for cats for all
lifestages. The NRC (2006) recommended allowance for
riboflavin for dogs is 5.25 mg/kg DM for growth and mainte-
nance and 5.3 mg/kg DM for gestation and lactation. For cats,
the NRC (2006) recommended allowance for riboflavin is 4.0
mg/kg DM for all lifestages. Table 6-5 lists AAFCO and NRC
allowances for dogs and cats.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Deficiency of riboflavin in dogs and cats is uncommon but
may manifest as dermatitis, erythema, weight loss, cataracts,
impaired reproduction, neurologic changes and anorexia
(NRC, 1985; Street and Cowgill, 1939; Street et al, 1941).
Measurement of erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity is
commonly used to evaluate riboflavin status in people and
animals. Table 6-5 lists riboflavin blood values for dogs and
cats. Most commercial pet foods are supplemented with syn-
thetic riboflavin. Toxicity has not been reported to occur in
dogs and cats.
SOURCES
Riboflavin is widely distributed in foods, primarily bound to
proteins as FMN and FAD. Rich sources include dairy prod-
ucts, organ meats (e.g., liver, heart, kidney), muscle meats, eggs,
green plants and yeast. Cereal grains are poor sources of vita-
min B2. The supplemental form for addition to foods is usual-
ly riboflavin.
Niacin
Niacin is the generic term used to describe compounds that
exhibit biologic activity of nicotinamide. Two major forms of
niacin are nicotinic acid and nicotinamide.
FUNCTION
Nicotinic acid and nicotinamide are substituted pyridine ring
structures (pyridine 3-carboxylic acid and nicotinic acid amide).
Niacin must be converted to either nicotinamide-adenine din-
ucleotide (NADH) or nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH) to participate in enzymatic reactions or
protein modification.
Niacin, in its cofactor form, is essential to several physiolog-
ic reactions: 1) oxidoreductive reactions, 2) nonredox reactions,
3) cleavage of β-N-glycosidic bonds with transfer of ADP-
ribose to proteins (post-translational modification) and 4) for-
mation of cyclic ADP-ribose (mobilizes intracellular calcium).
Oxidoreductive reactions are the primary function, but the
others are significant in proper cell function. Generally,
NAD/NADH is involved in catabolic reactions and transfers
the reducing power (electrons) acquired from intermediary
metabolites to the electron transport chain to ultimately produce
adenosine triphosphate. Alternatively, NADP/NADPH is gen-
erally involved in biosynthetic reactions that transfer reducing
power (electrons) to macromolecules such as fat, protein and
carbohydrate.
133
Minerals and Vitamins
Table 6-6. Thiaminase activity in fish products.*
Food
Thiaminase activity**
Marlin
0
Yellowfin tuna
265
Red snapper
265
Skipjack tuna
1,000
Dolphin (mahi mahi)
120
Ladyfish
35
Clam
2,640
*Adapted from Hilker DM, Peter OF. Anti-thiamin activity in
Hawaii fish. Journal of Nutrition 1966; 89: 419-421.
**mg thiamin destroyed/100 g fish/hour.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 132 ---
METABOLISM
Niacin in foods is found mainly as NADH and NADPH,
which may be free or bound to other macromolecules. After
ingestion, NADH and NADPH undergo hydrolysis by the
intestinal mucosa to release free nicotinamide, which is read-
ily absorbed (Brody, 1994a). Dietary niacin (nicotinic acid and
nicotinamide) is absorbed readily through the gastric and
small intestinal mucosa. Both free nicotinic acid and nicoti-
namide are found in blood.Tissues readily take up these com-
pounds to synthesize required cofactors, which also trap the
compound in cells. Excess niacin is methylated and excreted
in urine.
Niacin may also be synthesized from tryptophan via the
kynurenin pathway, which results in formation of nicotinic acid
ribonucleotide. Some enzymes in this pathway require vitamin
B6 and iron as cofactors. In most mammals, foods high in tryp-
tophan can alleviate signs of niacin deficiency. However, cats
cannot efficiently use tryptophan to synthesize niacin because
they have a very high enzymatic activity of picolinic carboxylase
that decisively leads the metabolism of tryptophan to acetyl-
CoA and CO2 instead of NAD (Sudadolnik et al, 1957; Baker
and Czarnecki-Maulden, 1991).Thus, cats have a strict dietary
requirement for preformed niacin.
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) recommended allowance for niacin is
11.4 mg/kg DM for dogs and 60 mg/kg DM for cats for all
lifestages.The NRC (2006) recommended allowance for niacin
is 17 mg/kg DM for dogs and 40 mg/kg DM for cats for all
lifestages. Table 6-5 lists AAFCO and NRC allowances for
dogs and cats.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Deficiency of niacin results in pellagra with its classic 4D
signs: dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia and death. Clinical
deficiency is uncommon in dogs because most commercial
pet foods are supplemented with niacin. Cats, however, are
more likely to develop signs of deficiency because of their
strict requirement for niacin. Niacin is a fairly stable vita-
min. Processing conditions may release some bound niacin,
which increases availability. Niacin deficiency may occur
when foods with low quantities of niacin and tryptophan are
ingested.
Measurement of methylated nicotinamide levels in urine best
substantiates niacin deficiency. Niacin metabolites in whole
blood have been reported for dogs and cats (Table 6-5), but
these values generally have not been useful markers of deficien-
cy in other species (Baker et al, 1986; Jacob and Swendseid,
1996). No niacin toxicity information in cats is available.
However, excessive ingestion of nicotinic acid causes bloody
stool, convulsions and even death (Chen et al, 1938).
SOURCES
Niacin is a very stable vitamin found in a variety of food-
stuffs. The greatest amounts of niacin are found in yeast, ani-
mal/fish by-products, cereals, legumes and oilseeds. Niacin
occurs in animal tissues as NAD and NADP and in plants
mostly as protein-bound forms. Niacin is generally added to
most pet foods as nicotinic acid or nicotinamide.
Pyridoxine
Pyridoxine is also generally called vitamin B6. However, vita-
min B6 is a generic descriptor for all 3-hydroxy-2-methylpyri-
dine derivatives exhibiting the biologic activity of pyridoxine.
The three naturally occurring forms of vitamin B6 are pyridox-
al, pyridoxine and pyridoxamine.
FUNCTION
The biologically active forms of vitamin B6 are the coen-
zymes pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) and pyridoxamine phos-
phate (PMP). PLP is involved in most reactions of amino acid
metabolism,
including transamination,
decarboxylation,
desulfhydration and nonoxidative deamination. PLP is also
involved in the catabolism of glycogen and metabolism of
lipids. As a coenzyme for decarboxylase enzymes, PLP func-
tions in the synthesis of serotonin, epinephrine, norepinephrine
and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Pyridoxine is involved in
vasodilatation through the production of histamine and is
required in the pathway where niacin is produced from trypto-
phan. Pyridoxine helps catalyze the synthesis of taurine from
cysteine and participates with ascorbic acid and NAD in the
synthesis of carnitine from the amino acid lysine. Pyridoxine is
also involved with the synthesis of the heme precursor por-
phyrin (as a coenzyme for δ-aminolevulinate synthase).
METABOLISM
The various forms of vitamin B6 (pyridoxine, pyridoxal, pyri-
doxamine, PLP, PMP) are freely absorbed via passive diffusion
in the small intestine. The glucuronide form is not absorbed.
The predominant form of vitamin B6 in blood is PLP, which
is tightly bound to proteins. Pyridoxal crosses cell membranes
more readily than PLP does. After uptake by cells, the vitamin
is again phosphorylated by pyridoxal kinase to yield the pre-
dominant tissue form, PLP, which is considered to be the most
active vitamin B6 form.
The vitamin B6 forms are readily interconverted metaboli-
cally by reactions involving phosphorylation/dephosphoryla-
tion, oxidation/reduction and amination/deamination. Phos-
phorylation appears to be an important means of retaining the
vitamin intracellularly. Only small quantities of vitamin B6 are
stored in the body.The products of vitamin B6 metabolism are
excreted in the urine; pyridoxic acid is the predominant meta-
bolic product. Different from other species, cats excrete little
pyridoxic acid in urine even after a large oral dose of pyridox-
ine hydrochloride (Coburn and Mahuren, 1987). The main
metabolites of vitamin B6 in cat urine are pyridoxine 3-sulfate,
pyridoxal 3-sulfate and N-methylpyridoxine.
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) recommended allowance for pyridox-
ine is 1 mg/kg DM for dogs and 4 mg/kg DM for cats for all
lifestages. The NRC (2006) recommended allowance for
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
134
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 133 ---
pyridoxine is 1.5 mg/kg DM for dogs and 2.5 mg/kg DM for
cats for all lifestages. Table 6-5 lists AAFCO and NRC
allowances for dogs and cats.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Signs of vitamin B6 deficiency include anorexia, reduced
growth, muscle weakness, neurologic signs, (e.g., hyperirritabil-
ity and seizures), anemia, and irreversible kidney lesions.
Oxalate crystalluria is also a notable sign in pyridoxine-defi-
cient cats (NRC, 2006). Table 6-5 lists normal plasma levels of
pyridoxine for cats and dogs (Baker et al, 1986).
Because pyridoxic acid is not detected in the urine of vitamin
B6-deficient subjects, this metabolite is useful in the clinical
assessment of vitamin B6 status. Measurement of xanthurenic
acid excretion after a tryptophan load, however, is a more sen-
sitive indicator of vitamin B6 status. When vitamin B6 is defi-
cient, the conversion of tryptophan to niacin is impaired, result-
ing in increased production of xanthurenic acid. Other indices
of vitamin B6 status are plasma concentrations of PLP and ery-
throcyte transaminase.
The prevalence of vitamin B6 toxicity appears to be low.
Earliest detectable signs include ataxia and loss of small motor
control. Many of the signs of toxicity resemble those of vitamin
B6 deficiency: ataxia, muscle weakness and loss of balance.
Histologic examination of tissues from dogs fed more than 200
mg pyridoxine hydrochloride/kg body weight/day revealed
bilateral loss of myelin and axons in the dorsal funiculi and loss
of myelin in the dorsal nerve roots (Phillips et al, 1978). There
is no information regarding vitamin B6 toxicity in cats.
SOURCES
Vitamin B6 is widely distributed in foods, occurring in great-
est concentrations in meats, whole-grain products, vegetables
and nuts. The chemical forms of vitamin B6 tend to vary
among foods of plant and animal origin; plant tissues contain
mostly pyridoxine, whereas animal tissues contain mostly pyri-
doxal and pyridoxamine. Pyridoxine is far more stable than
either pyridoxal or pyridoxamine, thus processing losses are
greatest in foods containing animal products. Losses can be as
high as 70% (average losses from 0 to 40%) (McDowell, 1989).
Pyridoxine hydrochloride is most often used for supplementa-
tion because it is relatively stable.
Pantothenic Acid
Pantothenic acid is the trivial designation for dihydroxy-β, β-
dimethylbutyryl-β-alanine. Only the dextrorotatory form of
pantothenic acid has biologic activity. It occurs mainly in bound
form, (i.e., coenzyme A [CoA] and acyl-carrier protein), in
most foods and feedstuffs. Pantothenic acid in foods is fairly
stable at cooking temperatures and during storage. However,
appreciable losses (up to 50%) have been reported during can-
ning and storage of some foods at pH values greater than 7 and
less than 5 (Combs, 1998).
FUNCTION
CoA is found in all tissues and is one of the most important
coenzymes for metabolism. CoA plays a critical role in the tri-
carboxylic acid cycle for production of ATP from fat (glycerol
and fatty acids), glucose and amino acids. CoA is also involved
in the synthesis of fatty acids, steroid hormones and cholesterol.
CoA is necessary for oxidation of fatty acids, pyruvate and
ketoglutarate (Machlin, 1991).
METABOLISM
CoA and acyl-carrier protein are the predominant forms of
pantothenic acid in foods and foodstuffs. Thus, hydrolytic
digestion of these protein complexes is the first step in metab-
olism of this vitamin. Both forms are degraded to pantothenic
acid in the lumen of the intestine in a series of steps.
Absorption occurs via a saturable, sodium-dependent, energy-
requiring process. At high concentrations, simple diffusion
occurs throughout the small intestine. In dogs, more than 80%
of free pantothenate is absorbed from the gut (Taylor et al,
1974). Urinary β-glucuronide is the major form of excretion
(Taylor et al, 1972). Pantothenic acid is transported in the free
acid form in plasma. Erythrocytes contain predominantly
acetyl-CoA.
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) recommended allowance for pan-
tothenic acid is 10 mg/kg DM for dogs and 5 mg/kg DM for
cats for all lifestages. Less pantothenic acid is apparently
required to optimize growth when high-protein foods are fed,
whereas high-fat diets may increase the requirement for pan-
tothenic acid (McDowell, 1989).The NRC (2006) recommen-
dation for pantothenic acid allowance is 15 mg/kg DM for
dogs regardless of lifestage.For cats,the NRC (2006) allowance
for pantothenic acid is 5.7 mg/kg DM for growth, and 5.75
mg/kg DM for maintenance and reproduction. Table 6-5 lists
AAFCO and NRC allowances for dogs and cats.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Naturally occurring deficiency of pantothenic acid is rare.
Dogs with pantothenic acid deficiency have erratic appetites,
depressed growth, fatty livers, decreased antibody response,
hypocholesterolemia and coma, in later stages. Pantothenic
acid-deficient cats developed fatty livers and became emaciated
(NRC, 2006). Normal whole blood concentrations of pan-
tothenic acid for dogs and cats are listed in Table 6-5 (Baker et
al, 1986).
Pantothenic acid is generally regarded as nontoxic. No
adverse reactions or clinical signs other than gastric upset have
been observed in any species following ingestion of large doses.
SOURCES
“Pantothenic acid” is derived from the Greek word “pantos”
meaning “found everywhere.”Although this vitamin is found in
practically all foodstuffs, the quantity present is generally insuf-
ficient for most monogastric species. The most important
sources are meats (especially liver and heart), rice and wheat
bran, alfalfa, peanut meal, yeast and fish solubles. Calcium pan-
tothenate is the predominant form added to pet foods.
135
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 134 ---
Folic Acid
Folic acid was first discovered in 1943 and was classified as vita-
mins B10 and B11.The structure of folic acid may be subdivid-
ed into three functional components: the middle group is para-
aminobenzoic acid (PABA), flanked on one side by a pteridine
ring, and on the other side by a polyglutamic acid chain. Folate
is the name commonly used to designate a family of com-
pounds with the biologic activity of folic acid (Brody, 1994a;
Selhub and Rosenberg, 1996).
FUNCTION
Folic acid functions as a one-carbon (methylene, methenyl,
methyl) donor and acceptor molecule in intermediary metabo-
lism. Specific pathways include nucleotide biosynthesis, phos-
pholipid synthesis, amino acid metabolism, neurotransmitter
production and creatinine formation. In addition, vitamin B12
is closely paired with folate in the production of methionine
from homocysteine, which will be discussed later in this section.
METABOLISM
Natural sources of folic acid undergo hydrolysis by the intes-
tinal enzyme γ-glutamyl hydrolase to form folylmonoglutamate,
which is subsequently absorbed by enterocytes. Thus, the major
form of folic acid in blood is the monoglutamate form. After
target cells absorb folylmonoglutamate, additional glutamates
are added to the tail, which trap the molecule within cells.
Folic acid must be in the reduced form (i.e., dihydro or
tetrahydro) to participate in one-carbon metabolic reactions.
The enzyme dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) interconverts
dihydrofolates to tetrahydrofolates. Inhibition of this enzyme
interferes with intermediary pathways that require reduced
folates for coenzymes. C677T mutation in the methylenete-
trahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene also affects folate
metabolism and requirement (Golbahar et al, 2005).
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) recommended allowance for folic acid
is 0.18 mg/kg DM for dogs and 0.8 mg/kg DM for cats for all
lifestages, respectively. The NRC (2006) recommended
allowance for folic acid is 270 µg/kg DM for dogs and 750
µg/kg DM for cats regardless of lifestage. Table 6-5 lists
AAFCO and NRC allowances for dogs and cats.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Folate deficiency is characterized by poor weight gain, mega-
loblastic anemia, anorexia, leukopenia, glossitis and decreased
immune function. In cats, folate deficiency is associated with
hyperhomocysteinemia and greatly augmented urinary excre-
tion of formiminoglutamic acid (Yu and Morris, 1998). Folate
deficiency has been linked to the risk of neural tube defects in
people (Mitchell,2005).Folate levels in blood may be measured
to confirm a deficiency suggested by clinical signs. Table 6-5
lists plasma levels for healthy cats and dogs (Baker et al, 1986).
There have been no reported cases of folate toxicity. Neither
NRC nor AAFCO has proposed a dietary maximum concen-
tration for folic acid.
SOURCES
Folate is found in several foods, but is unstable in a variety of
conditions. Liver, egg yolks and green vegetables are good
sources of folate. The vitamin is destroyed by heating, pro-
longed freezing and during storage in water. Commercial pet
foods are supplemented with folate to overcome the effects of
processing and storage.
Biotin
Biotin consists of an imidazole ring fused to a tetrahydrothio-
phene ring with a valeric acid side chain. It has eight possible
stereoisomers in nature but only d-(+)-biotin is physiologically
active (NRC, 2006). Biotin is unstable to oxidation and heat.
FUNCTION
Biotin is an essential cofactor for four different carboxylase
reactions in mammals. These carboxylases have important
functions in the metabolism of lipids, glucose, some amino
acids and energy.
METABOLISM
The majority of biotin in food sources is thought to be cova-
lently bound to proteins. After ingestion, biotin must be
hydrolyzed from protein by the enzyme biotinidase in pancre-
atic juice before absorption in the intestine (Brody, 1994a;
Mock, 1996). After hydrolysis, free biotin is actively absorbed
through a biotin transporter that requires both an intact ureide
group and a free carboxyl group on valeric acid (NRC, 2006).
Avidin in raw egg white can tightly bind biotin and is resistant
to intestinal proteolysis and heat treatment, making biotin
unavailable for absorption. After absorption from the intestine,
biotin is transported in the free form in the plasma to the
required tissues where it is linked to its target apoenzyme by the
enzyme holocarboxylase synthetase. The kidneys eliminate
excess biotin. Increasing urinary excretion of 3-hydroxyisova-
leric acid, an indicator of reduced activity of the biotin-depend-
ent enzyme methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase, and decreasing
biotin in urine are early and sensitive indicators of biotin defi-
ciency (Mock et al, 2002).
REQUIREMENTS
Neither AAFCO (2007) nor NRC (2006) has a recommen-
dation for biotin for dogs. However, diets containing raw egg
white and/or antibiotics may need biotin supplementation.The
AAFCO (2007) biotin recommendation for cats is 0.07 mg/kg
DM for all lifestages. The NRC (2006) recommended
allowance for biotin for cats is 75 µg/kg DM regardless of
lifestage. Table 6-5 lists AAFCO and NRC allowances for
dogs and cats.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Naturally occurring biotin deficiency is very rare in dogs and
cats (NRC, 2006). Feeding raw egg whites and administering
oral antimicrobials are probably the two most common causes
of biotin deficiency. Raw egg whites contain the glycoprotein
avidin, which binds biotin rendering it unavailable for absorp-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
136
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 135 ---
tion. Feeding avidin to cats may result in signs of biotin defi-
ciency that include dermatitis, alopecia and a dull coat (Pastoor
et al, 1993). Because gut microbial synthesis may meet half the
biotin requirement, antimicrobials that decrease the population
of the intestinal microflora may also result in signs of biotin
deficiency. Clinical signs include poor growth, dermatitis,
lethargy and neurologic abnormalities (Case 6-10). Table 6-5
lists biotin blood values for dogs and cats (Baker et al, 1986).
Biotin toxicity has not been reported. Neither AAFCO
(2007) nor NRC (2006) has proposed a dietary maximum con-
centration for biotin.
SOURCES
Mammalian tissues are incapable of synthesizing biotin.
The biotin requirement is probably met by two sources: diet
and microbes (Brody, 1994a; Mock, 1996). Biotin is widely
distributed in foods, but mostly in very low, highly variable
concentrations. Oilseeds, egg yolks, alfalfa meal, liver and
yeast are the most important natural sources of biotin.
Marked losses of biotin may occur as a result of oxidation,
canning, heat and solvent extraction of foodstuffs. Less than
one-half of the biotin in various foodstuffs is biologically
available (McDowell, 1989). Most commercial pet foods are
supplemented with synthetic biotin.
Vitamin B12
Vitamin B12 or cobalamin is the generic descriptor for all cor-
rinoids exhibiting the biologic activity of cyanocobalamin.
Vitamin B12 is the largest and most complex B vitamin and the
only one to contain a metal ion, cobalt. The structure consists
of four pyrrole rings linked to form a macrocyclic ring designat-
ed as corrin, which is similar to hemoglobin. Substitutions on
the corrin ring account for the different recognized forms of
vitamin B12. The active forms of B12, 5’deoxyadenosylcobal-
amin and methylcobalamin, are very unstable (Brody, 1994a;
Herbert, 1996). Substituted forms of vitamin B12 are much
more stable and may be used as pharmaceutical supplements
(cyanocobalamin, hydroxocobalamin, nitritocobalamin).
FUNCTION
Vitamin B12 is important in one-carbon metabolism. In
dogs and cats, methylcobalamin, which contains cobalt in the
1+ state, is a coenzyme for methionine synthase and
5’deoxyadenosylmethionine, which contains cobalt in the 2+
state is a coenzyme for methylmalonyl-CoA mutase. Vitamin
B12 is required by the enzyme methionine synthase that
removes a methyl group from methyl tetrahydrofolate (THF)
to regenerate THF, which is needed for pyrimidine biosynthe-
sis. This intimate relationship with folate may result in folate
trapping in B12 deficiency and the resultant megaloblastic ane-
mia of folate deficiency.
METABOLISM
Dietary vitamin B12 is freed from food peptides and proteins
by hydrolysis (gastric acidification and pancreatic enzymes).
Free vitamin B12 binds to intrinsic factor (IF), a glycoprotein
secreted from gastric parietal cells. IF is essential for vitamin
B12 absorption in people. In dogs, the pancreas is the major
and the stomach a lesser source of IF. In cats, the pancreas
appears to be the sole source of IF (NRC, 2006). The stable
vitamin B12-IF complex is absorbed in the ileum via cell sur-
face specific receptors. Vitamin B12 may also be absorbed in
the jejunum of dogs and cats (Gazet and McColl, 1967). After
absorption, vitamin B12 is transported in blood by transcobal-
amin I and II.Transcobalamin I (haptocorrin) is a glycoprotein
that carries almost all vitamin B12 in the blood of people.
Transcobalamin II, a protein without a carbohydrate moiety,
carries about 75% of vitamin B12 in the blood of dogs and cats.
Cat and dog plasma do not contain transcobalamin I, but have
another transport protein, transcobalamin O, which carries
about 10 to 15% of vitamin B12 (Linnel et al, 1979). All DNA-
synthesizing cells take up vitamin B12 from the blood via cell
surface specific receptors.
REQUIREMENTS
The AAFCO (2007) recommended allowance for vitamin
B12 is 0.022 mg/kg DM for dogs and 0.020 mg/kg cats for all
lifestages. The NRC (2006) recommended allowance for vita-
min B12 is 35 µg cobalamin/kg DM for dogs and 22.5 µg/kg
DM for cats regardless of lifestages. Table 6-5 lists AAFCO
and NRC allowances for dogs and cats.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Vitamin B12 deficiency is very rare but may result in poor
growth and neuropathies in dogs (Case 6-11). Because vita-
min B12 is only made by microbes and found in animal tis-
sue, long-term feeding of vegetarian diets may lead to vitamin
B12 deficiency.
Vitamin B12 may be directly assessed by determination of
serum vitamin B12 levels or indirectly by determination of
serum or urine methylmalonic acid (MMA) (Brody, 1994a).
MMA levels in serum and urine increase with vitamin B12
deficiency. A newer test, serum holotranscobalamin II, may
prove useful in the future to detect early vitamin B12 deficien-
cy (Herbert, 1996). Whole blood levels of cobalamin for dogs
and cats are listed in Table 6-5 (Baker et al, 1986).
Oral toxicity of vitamin B12 has not been reported in dogs
and cats. Neither AAFCO (2007) nor NRC (2006) has pro-
posed a dietary maximum concentration for vitamin B12.
SOURCES
Only certain microorganisms synthesize cobalamin.
Microbes and yeast can make vitamin B12 for absorption by
animals.Plants generally contain very small amounts of vitamin
B12. Meat and, to some degree, milk products are good sources
of vitamin B12. Most commercial pet foods are supplemented
with stable vitamin B12.
Choline
Choline is traditionally classified as one of the B-complex vita-
mins although it does not entirely satisfy the strict definition of
a vitamin; many animals can synthesize choline in the liver. In
137
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 136 ---
addition, choline is required in the body in substantially greater
amounts (>1,000 mg/kg) than the other B vitamins (<100
mg/kg). Furthermore, choline does not function as a coenzyme
or cofactor as do most other B vitamins.
Choline, 2-hydroxy-N, N, N-trimethylethanaminium, has
three methyl groups that enable choline to serve as a methyl
donor in the body.It is an integral component of lecithin (phos-
phatidylcholine). Choline is a strong base and decomposes in
alkaline solution.
FUNCTION
Choline plays several important roles in the body. It is an
integrated component of phosphatidylcholine, a structural ele-
ment of biologic membranes. Phosphatidylcholine also pro-
motes lipid transport. Diminished synthesis of phosphatidyl-
choline in the liver due to choline deficiency results in accumu-
lation of lipids in the liver. Choline, as acetylcholine, is a neu-
rotransmitter. Choline, as a component of platelet-activating
factor (1-O-alkyl-2acetyl-sm-glycero-3-phophocholine), is
important in clotting and inflammation. After oxidation to
betaine, choline is a source of labile methyl groups for trans-
methylation reactions (e.g., the formation of methionine from
homocysteine and creatine from guanidoacetic acid).
METABOLISM
Choline is present in food predominantly as phosphatidyl-
choline; less than 10% is present as either the free base or sphin-
gomyelin (Combs,1998).Choline is released from phosphatidyl-
choline and sphingomyelin by digestive enzymes and absorbed
from the jejunum and ileum mainly by a carrier-mediated
process. Intestinal microorganisms metabolize most free choline
ingested to trimethylamine, which is absorbed and excreted in
urine. Phosphatidylcholine is not subject to such extensive
microbial metabolism; therefore, metabolism of phosphatidyl-
choline results in less urinary trimethylamine. Once absorbed,
choline is transported in the lymphatic circulation primarily in
the form of phosphatidylcholine bound to chylomicrons.
Most species can synthesize choline, as phosphatidylcholine,
by the sequential methylation of phosphatidylethanolamine.
The activity is greatest in the liver, but is also found in many
other tissues.
REQUIREMENTS
The requirement for choline is affected greatly by dietary fac-
tors such as methionine, betaine, myoinositol, folate and vita-
min B12, as well as the combination of different levels and
composition of fat, carbohydrate and protein in the diet. In
addition, age, gender, caloric intake and growth rate influence
the lipotrophic action of choline and thereby its requirement.
Choline and methionine are the two principal methyl donors
in transmethylation.Therefore, dietary adequacy of methionine
and choline directly affects the requirement of the other.
Methionine can completely replace choline as a methyl donor.
For example, in cat foods, if dietary methionine exceeds 0.62%
DM, 3.75 parts of methionine can be substituted for 1 part
choline (AAFCO, 2007).
Vitamin B12 and folate are required for the synthesis of
methyl groups and metabolism of the one-carbon unit.
Biosynthesis of labile methyl from a formate carbon requires
folate, whereas vitamin B12 plays a role in regulated transfer of
the methyl group to tetrahydrofolic acid. Therefore, a deficien-
cy of one or both of these vitamins increases the requirement
for choline.
Excess dietary protein and/or high-fat foods increase the
choline requirement. In most species, the choline requirement
is greater for younger animals than for adults. Some adult
species may not require choline.
The AAFCO (2007) recommended allowance for choline is
1,200 mg/kg DM for dogs and 2,400 mg/kg DM for cats for
all lifestages. The NRC (2006) recommended allowance for
choline is 1,700 mg/kg DM for dogs and 2,550 mg/kg DM for
cats regardless of lifestage. Table 6-5 lists AAFCO and NRC
allowances for dogs and cats.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Choline deficiency in most animal species is characterized by
depressed growth, hepatic steatosis and hemorrhagic renal
degeneration (Combs, 1998). Additional signs of choline defi-
ciency in dogs include thymic atrophy and elevated plasma phos-
phatase values and increased blood prothrombin time. Table 6-5
lists normal plasma levels of choline for cats and dogs (Baker et
al, 1986). Choline and phosphatidylcholine levels in blood may
be measured to confirm deficiency suggested by clinical signs.
Studies with dogs suggested a low tolerance to lecithin
(phosphatidylcholine). Reduced erythrocytes resulted from
daily oral administration of lecithin (equivalent to 150 mg of
choline) (NRC, 1987). However, neither AAFCO (2007) nor
NRC (2006) has recommended a maximum or safe upper limit
for dietary choline for dogs and cats.
SOURCES
All natural fats contain some choline; therefore, choline is
widely distributed in foods and foodstuffs. Lecithin has also
been shown to be an effective emulsifying agent in foods and is
the form of choline ingested in most foods. Egg yolks, glandu-
lar meals and fish are the richest animal sources and cereal
germs, legumes and oilseed meals are the best plant sources.
Choline is added to most pet foods as choline chloride and is
added separately from the vitamin premix because of its hygro-
scopic nature and propensity to reduce the stability of other
vitamins if added in the premix.
Vitamin C
Because of de novo synthesis, vitamin C is not technically a
vitamin for healthy dogs and cats. (See vitamin definition.)
However, it is included here because of its biochemical func-
tions, including in vivo and in vitro antioxidant properties
(Chapter 7).
FUNCTION
Vitamin C, ascorbic acid or specifically L-ascorbic acid, is a
very labile compound that is readily oxidized to dehy-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
138
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 137 ---
droascorbic acid. It requires a reducing enzyme (dehy-
droascorbic acid reductase) to transform it back to the active
form. Vitamin C primarily functions in the body as an antiox-
idant and free radical scavenger. Ascorbic acid is best known
for its role in collagen synthesis, where it is involved in
hydroxylation of prolyl and lysyl residues of procollagen
(Combs, 1998). It is also involved in drug, steroid and tyro-
sine metabolism (McDowell, 1989) and electron transport.
Ascorbic acid is also necessary for synthesis of L-carnitine, an
important carrier of acyl groups across mitochondrial mem-
branes. Normal circulating plasma levels are 4 µg/ml in dogs
and 3 µg/ml in cats (Baker et al, 1986).
More recently, research into the role of ascorbic acid has
shifted from prevention of deficiency to the treatment and pre-
vention of disease. Because ascorbic acid protects against free-
radical damage induced by the “oxidative burst” of neutrophils
(Combs, 1998; Levine et al, 1994), and stimulates the phago-
cytic effect of leukocytes, it plays a role in immune function
(McDowell, 1989). Larger doses may play a protective role
against carcinogenesis. Ascorbic acid acts as a nitrate scavenger,
thereby reducing nitrosamine-induced carcinogenesis. Vitamin
C has been associated with a reduced risk for gastric cancer, oral
cancer and perhaps lung cancer, but had no effect on cancer of
the pancreas, colon and prostate gland (Sauberlich, 1991).
Vitamin C may even play a role in the prevention of gingi-
val and periodontal disease. Studies with people have shown
that 600 mg/day (10x the recommended dietary allowance)
significantly reduced gingival bleeding upon probing
(Leggott et al, 1986). Whether this effect can be demonstrat-
ed in species that synthesize their own ascorbate (i.e., cats and
dogs) remains to be seen.
Ascorbic acid may have some benefit in exercise stress
recovery (Kronfeld, 1983). However, megadose supplementa-
tion to prevent hip dysplasia has not proved effective
(Richardson, 1992).
METABOLISM
Most higher animals can synthesize vitamin C from glucose
via the glucuronic acid pathway. People and some animals such
as guinea pigs, fish, fruit-eating bats, insects and some birds
cannot synthesize vitamin C because they lack the key enzyme
L-gulonolactone oxidase. In these species, vitamin C is
absorbed by a saturable, carrier-mediated, active-transport
mechanism that is sodium dependent. Species that can synthe-
size ascorbic acid absorb it strictly by passive diffusion. In either
case, absorption efficiency of physiologic doses is more than
80% (Combs, 1998).
Vitamin C is transported in the plasma in association with
albumin, mostly in a reduced form. Under physiologic condi-
tions, vitamin C exists as ascorbate, which cannot cross most
membranes readily.Cellular uptake of vitamin C involves dehy-
droascorbic acid in erythrocytes, lymphocytes and neutrophils.
Once inside the cell, dehydroascorbic acid is quickly reduced to
ascorbic acid by an intracellular enzyme (dehydroascorbic acid
reductase), which uses reduced glutathione (GSH) as the
source of reducing equivalents. Ascorbic acid is widely distrib-
uted throughout tissues, both in animals capable of synthesiz-
ing ascorbic acid and those that depend on dietary vitamin C.
The pituitary and adrenal glands have the highest concentra-
tions of vitamin C; high levels are also found in the liver, spleen,
brain and pancreas. Ascorbic acid is excreted in urine, sweat and
feces. Losses in feces and sweat are usually minimal.
Because vitamin C is not an essential nutrient for dogs and
cats, neither AAFCO nor NRC lists recommendations.
DEFICIENCY AND TOXICITY
Acute vitamin C deficiency results in scurvy (in animals
unable to synthesize the vitamin). In general, high intake of
vitamin C is considered to be of low toxicity.
SOURCES
Fruits, vegetables and organ meats are generally the best
sources of vitamin C. The vitamin C content of most foods
decreases dramatically during storage and processing.
Polyphosphorylated forms of vitamin C are available that can
survive processing conditions.
Vitamin-Like Substances
Vitamin-like substances are substances that exhibit properties
similar to those of vitamins, but do not fit the strict definition
of a vitamin.They have physiologic functionality, but question-
able essentiality.These compounds can be “conditionally essen-
tial” depending on the metabolic capacity of the animal.
L-carnitine
L-carnitine is one of the most well known vitamin-like sub-
stances. L-carnitine is a natural component of all animal cells
(Bremer, 1983; Rebouche and Paulson, 1986). Its primary
function is to transport long-chain fatty acids across the inner
mitochondrial membrane into the mitochondrial matrix for β-
oxidation (Bremer, 1983; Fritz, 1958). Skeletal and cardiac
muscle contain 95 to 98% of the L-carnitine in the body and
are significant storage sites (Rebouche and Engel, 1983).
The biosynthesis of L-carnitine requires five enzymatic steps
that occur in many cells in the body (Bremer, 1983). The final
step in which butyrobetaine is converted to L-carnitine is rate
limiting and occurs primarily in the liver (Bremer, 1983).
Lysine, methionine, ascorbic acid, ferrous ions, vitamin B6 and
niacin are important in L-carnitine metabolism; these nutrients
are required substrates and cofactors for the enzymes involved
in L-carnitine biosynthesis (Borum, 1986).
Clinical signs of L-carnitine deficiency include chronic mus-
cle weakness, fasting hypoglycemia, cardiomyopathy, hep-
atomegaly and dicarboxylic aciduria (Stanley, 1987). In many
cases of L-carnitine deficiency, no clinical signs are apparent
(Borum, 1986).
Carotenoids
Carotenoids are a class of lipophilic natural pigments that are
widely distributed throughout the plant and animal kingdom.
Only plants, bacteria, fungi and algae synthesize carotenoids;
however, animals can accumulate carotenoids in their tissues
139
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 138 ---
after oral ingestion. In plants, carotenoids play essential light-
harvesting roles during photosynthetic events and protect
membranes against photo-oxidative damage. More than 600
different compounds are classified as carotenoids, but fewer
than 10% can be metabolized into vitamin A. In contrast to
many other mammals, cats are unable to convert β-carotene to
vitamin A; therefore,cats must rely solely on preformed vitamin
A in their diet (Schweigert et al, 2002). The carotenoids found
in greatest abundance in a variety of foodstuffs are β-carotene,
α-carotene, lutein, lycopene, β-cryptoxanthin, zeaxanthin, can-
thaxanthin and astaxanthin. A primary characteristic of the
carotenoids is their conjugated polyene structure.
ABSORPTION AND TRANSPORT
Because carotenoids are lipophilic compounds, concurrent
ingestion of fat facilitates intestinal carotenoid absorption.
Bile salts are necessary for absorption of ingested fat and
carotenoids. The aggregation of bile salts into micelles, and
the formation of mixed micelles with the products of lipid
digestion and other lipid-soluble food constituents are essen-
tial in facilitating absorption of lipophilic compounds from
the intestine. At the brush border, micelles interact with
enterocytes where the lipophilic contents of micelles diffuse
out of the micelles and across the cell membrane. It is
believed that the uptake of carotenoids by enterocytes occurs
passively and is not carrier-mediated. Enterocytes package
carotenoids into chylomicrons, which migrate to the basal-
lateral cell membrane where they are exocytosed into the
intracellular space for passage to the lymphatic system. After
transportation in chylomicrons via the lymphatic system,
carotenoids are carried by lipoproteins and transported in the
bloodstream.
FUNCTION
Although carotenoids do not strictly fit the definition of a
vitamin for mammalian species, they have biologic activity
beyond their provitamin A role. Carotenoids with nine or more
double bonds function as antioxidants by quenching singlet
oxygen and other reactive oxygen species such as hydroxyl rad-
icals, superoxide anion radicals and hydrogen peroxide, which
are produced in normal metabolism (Chew, 1995; Bendich,
1989). Carotenoids sacrifice highly reactive multiple double
bonds to free radicals via hydrogen donation, thereby stabiliz-
ing reactive products. Carotenoids also protect cell membranes
by stabilizing the oxygen radicals produced when phagocytic
granulocytes undergo respiratory bursts that destroy intracellu-
lar pathogens (Bendich, 1989).
The immune-modulating properties of carotenoids have
been studied in dogs and cats. Supplementation with β-
carotene increases the CD4 T cell population in older dogs
to levels found in young dogs and improves T-cell prolifera-
tion (Massimino et al, 2003). Supplementation with β-
carotene or lutein, an oxycarotenoid found in corn and other
vegetables, stimulates cell-mediated and humoral immune
responses in dogs and cats (Chew et al, 2000; Kim et al,
2000; Kim et al, 2000a).
SOURCES
Carotenoids are responsible for the striking colors of many
yellow, orange and red fruits and vegetables, plant leaves, as well
as the colors in some species of fish, crustaceans and plumage
of some birds.
Bioflavonoids
The flavonoids are a group of red, blue, yellow and colorless
compounds that have vitamin-like activity. This class of com-
pounds was originally mistaken for vitamin C because crude
extracts of lemon juice and yellow peppers had antiscorbutic
effects. Originally called citrin (mixture of eriodictyol and hes-
peridin), vitamin P or vitamin C2, these compounds were
reclassified as flavonoids in 1950 (Combs, 1998; Machlin,
1991; Harborne, 1994). More than 5,000 flavonoids have been
identified (Harborne and Baxter, 1999). Flavonoids are classi-
fied in major and minor groups. Classes include flavonols, fla-
vanols, flavones, isoflavones and anthocyanins. Flavonols, (e.g.,
kaempferol, quercetin and myricetin, are present in tea, apples
and onions. Flavanols (also called catechins) are found in tea,
apples and red wine. Isoflavones such as genistein and daidzein
are constituents of soybeans. Anthocyanins provide the deep
red color to fruits such as berries.
ABSORPTION AND TRANSPORT
The availability varies widely among flavonoids depending
on the food source and the forms of flavonoids they contain.
Flavonoids are usually found naturally as glycosides linked to
sugars, except for catechins. The type of sugar moiety of the
glycoside affects availability, (e.g., quercetin glucosides are more
efficiently absorbed than quercetin rutinosides) (Hollman et al,
1999). Mammalian enzymatic systems are unable to hydrolyze
flavonoid glycosides, but the necessary glycosidases are present
in the gut microflora. After hydrolysis and absorption in the
small intestine, flavonoids are bound in the liver as glucuronides
or sulfate conjugates (Machlin, 1991). Recent studies with fla-
vanols have shown that glycosides can be absorbed without pre-
vious hydrolysis by microorganisms (Hollman et al, 1995).
Most of the flavonoids are further metabolized into phenolic
compounds and rapidly excreted, usually within 24 hours.
FUNCTION
Although many different flavonoids exist with many differ-
ent physiologic effects, this class of compounds shares some
similar functions. The most notable is the sparing effect that
flavonoids have on vitamin C. Flavonoids have the ability to
perform similarly to vitamin C: reduce capillary fragility and
permeability and chelate the divalent metal ions copper and
iron (Combs, 1998). Flavonoids can act as antioxidants because
they are very effective scavengers of free radicals. In fact,
flavonoid assays in vitro often exhibit stronger antioxidant
activity than vitamins E and C. Other non-antioxidant related
beneficial effects include prevention of angiogenesis (Cao and
Cao, 1999) and inhibition of cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase
(Laughton et al, 1991). Catechins, found in abundance in tea,
have been shown to modulate signal transduction pathways,
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
140
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 139 ---
have antiinflammatory activities and decrease cell proliferation
(Dong et al, 1997; McCarty, 1998). Data from studies using
animal models have shown that green and black tea consistent-
ly decrease cancers of the skin, lung, stomach, liver, mammary
gland and colon (Chung et al, 2003).Isoflavones present in soy-
beans have been associated with reduced risk of cardiovascular
disease, certain cancers and other degenerative diseases.
SOURCES
Flavonoids are ubiquitous in the plant kingdom. Significant
variation in the flavonoids present in leaf, petal, root, fruit and
seed can occur within the same plant. Flavonoid concentration
can vary within a given plant organ (i.e. in apples), flavonoids
tend to concentrate in the skin (Harborne, 2000).
Other Vitamin-Like Substances
Some other substances with vitamin-like activity include lipoic
acid, ubiquinones, orotic acid, inositol and p-aminobenzoic
acid. Animals synthesize most of these compounds, which are
important metabolic intermediates. They function: 1) in the
metabolism of fatty acids, 2) in the electron transport chain, 3)
as antioxidants and 4) as growth factors. Continued research in
“conditionally essential” nutrients may lead to vitamin classifi-
cation for many of these compounds.
ENDNOTES
a. Kirk CA. Hill’s Science and Technology Center,Topeka, KS,
USA. Personal communication, 1997.
b. Wedekind KJ. Hill’s Science and Technology Center,
Topeka, KS, USA. Unpublished data, 1997.
REFERENCES
The References for Chapter 6 can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
141
Minerals and Vitamins
CASE 6-1
Seizures in an Airedale Terrier
Patient Assessment
A 20-kg, eight-year-old, neutered male Airedale terrier was admitted to an emergency clinic after a 45-minute episode of contin-
uous seizure activity. The dog was moribund at presentation. Thirty-six hours before the onset of seizures, the dog had ingested a
salt-flour figurine, weighing approximately 100 g.The dog vomited a clear fluid three times within 12 hours after ingesting the fig-
urine and became progressively more polydipsic and polyuric.The dog then consumed an unknown additional volume of uncooked
salt-flour dough. Within an hour after ingesting this mixture, the dog developed generalized, fine-muscular fasciculations, which
rapidly progressed to clonic-tonic motor activity.
The moribund dog was unresponsive to painful stimuli, pyrectic (41.6°C [106.9°F]), tachypneic and had an irregular heart
rhythm. A generalized seizure occurred during the examination. Serum electrolyte and blood gas analysis revealed severe hyperna-
tremia (serum sodium 211 mEq/l, normal 145 to 158), hyperchloremia (serum chloride 180 mEq/l, normal 105 to 122) and meta-
bolic acidosis (serum pH 7.135, normal 7.32 to 7.38).
Treatment Plan
Treatment was initiated with intravenous fluids (5% dextrose in water), sodium bicarbonate, diazepam, phenobarbital and
furosemide. The dog was also cooled with ice-water wraps and electric fans. The dog suffered cardiopulmonary arrest five hours
later and died.
Further Assessment
At postmortem examination, one liter of putty-like, grayish-white material and clear, watery fluid were found in the stomach.
Hemorrhage was noted throughout the stomach and the proximal two-thirds of the small intestine. Acute renal and hepatic necro-
sis was found histopathologically. Sodium and chloride levels in tissues were higher than normal. The brain sodium level was 108
mEq/l (80 mEq/l is considered indicative of sodium salt toxicosis). Analysis of the liquid portion of the gastric contents showed
that a minimum of 20 g of sodium chloride remained in the stomach.
Bibliography
Khanna C, Boermans HJ, Wilcock B. Fatal hypernatremia in a dog from salt ingestion. Journal of the American Animal Hospital
Association 1997; 33: 113-117.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 140 ---
CASE 6-2
Vomiting and Diarrhea in a Yorkshire Terrier
Patient Assessment
A one-year-old, intact female Yorkshire terrier weighing 2.7 kg had a sudden onset of lethargy, watery diarrhea, vomiting, icterus
and red-colored urine. Abnormal laboratory findings included hemolyzed plasma, anemia, azotemia, leukocytosis, hemoglobinuria
and an elevated total bilirubin concentration. Abdominal radiographs revealed a metal object at the pylorus. The object was recog-
nized by the owner as a nut that had been missing for two weeks from an airfreight kennel used to house the dog. Serum zinc con-
centration was 32 mg/kg, compared with 1.1 mg/kg in serum obtained from a clinically normal dog at the same time.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
No dietary history was available. The manufacturer of the kennel indicated that the nut was made of pure zinc.
Treatment Plan
The nut was removed from the stomach using a fiberoptic endoscope. Additional therapy included intravenous fluids and a blood
transfusion.
Reassessment
The dog stopped vomiting but remained depressed and continued to have profuse watery diarrhea. Semi-solid feces were passed
on Day 5 after removal of the nut. The dog’s appetite returned on Day 6 and the dog steadily improved until discharge seven days
later. Serum zinc concentrations on Days 11 and 21 were 8.5 mg/kg and 1.0 mg/kg respectively (values for a clinically normal dog
were 0.7 mg/kg). The owner reported that the dog seemed completely normal three months after discharge.
On analysis, the nut contained 97% zinc, 2% aluminum and other elements.The nut removed from the stomach was highly cor-
roded and when its weight was compared with that of a new nut of the same design, it appeared that the dog received a total dose
of 703 mg zinc/kg body weight.
Bibliography
Torrance AG, Fulton RB. Zinc-induced hemolytic anemia in a dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 1987;
191: 443-444.
CASE 6-3
Reproductive Problems in a Group of Cats
Patient Assessment
A group of breeding domestic shorthair cats, ranging in age from two to five years and weighing from 3 to 4.5 kg, was presented
for poor reproductive performance, including failure to conceive, fetal resorption, small weak kittens and cannibalism. Neonatal kit-
tens from these queens had graying of hair, dry and curled coat texture and skeletal abnormalities including inverted carpi and
metatarsi, “kinked” tails and fused digits.
Physical examinations of the unbred queens were unremarkable. Some pregnant queens appeared slightly underweight for their
date of gestation but were otherwise normal when examined. Newborn litters contained several small kittens, weighing less than 70
g or kittens with gray-to-whitish coats over the caudal one-half to three-fourths of the body. The coat color over the head and feet
was unaffected.The coat texture of kittens less than three days old was somewhat dry and had a slightly curled appearance. Several
newborn kittens had kinked tails and inverted carpi. Kittens older than three weeks had normal coats and improvements in carpal
and tarsal malformations, but normal function or structure did not return in many kittens. Kittens with kinked tails and fused toes
did not improve with age.
Reproductive problems included a decline in conception rate from 100% to between 0 to 50% over an eight-month period. In
utero monitoring of pregnant queens through biweekly ultrasound examinations showed that the fetal loss rate was 67% and
occurred between 25 to 30 days of gestation. Food intake was only about two-thirds of that expected for the queens.
The initial evaluation included complete blood counts and serum biochemistry profiles for many of the queens and serum trace
mineral analyses and heavy metal toxicity screens for queens and affected kittens. The hemogram results included normal hemat-
ocrit and hemoglobin values with low mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentrations (hypochromasia) in four of six queens evalu-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
142
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 141 ---
ated. Heavy metal toxicity screens of affected kittens were unremarkable with the exception of high-hepatic zinc level in one kitten
and a single low-hepatic iron value. Serum copper concentrations for queens were normal, but hepatic copper values were not deter-
mined because queens were in active reproduction. In one- to two-week-old affected kittens, hepatic copper concentrations ranged
from 26.6 to 35.7 mg/kg and serum copper values from 0.3 to 0.4 mg/kg, which were deemed borderline low based on literature
values.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
A commercial dry cat food that had passed an AAFCO feeding trial for feline growth and maintenance had been fed for approx-
imately eight months to cats in this colony before any abnormalities were noted. The food was plant-based; the first four ingredi-
ents were corn, corn gluten meal, soybean meal and poultry by-product meal. In addition to containing typical vitamin and miner-
al supplements, the food also included copper oxide as a copper source and iron oxide as a colorant.
Analysis of the food disclosed no deficiencies when compared with recommended levels established for growing kittens.
However, high levels of zinc and iron were noted in the food. High levels of dietary phytates, which can reduce mineral absorption,
were expected to be in the food because of the plant ingredients it contained.
Feeding Plan
A dietary copper deficiency was considered the most likely cause of the reproductive failure noted in these queens. Although food
analysis revealed that dietary copper levels were more than adequate, the copper oxide used in the food is a completely unavailable
copper source for animals. Additionally, factors that impair copper absorption by chelation (phytates in plants) or transport compe-
tition (zinc and iron) were found in high concentrations in the food and would further impair absorption of available copper.
The cat food was supplemented with 15 mg/kg copper from an available source (i.e., copper sulfate).
Reassessment
After the food was supplemented with copper sulfate, the conception rate increased to 80% of breedings and in utero fetal death
rates decreased to 12.5%. Food intake increased to expected levels. Three months after feeding the supplemented food, coat pig-
mentation abnormalities and limb and tail deformities again became evident in newborn kittens. Serum samples were again col-
lected from pregnant queens for copper analysis. Copper values were low in four of nine queens, indicating continuing copper defi-
ciency. An additional 10 mg/kg of dietary copper as copper sulfate were added for a total of 25 mg/kg supplemental copper. No
abnormal kittens were born during the next five months.
Some less severe clinical signs of copper deficiency in kittens not consuming copper-supplemented food (i.e., queen’s milk only)
were reversible. Pigmentation and coat texture returned to normal and improved carpal flexion was observed with skeletal matura-
tion.
Bibliography
Morris JG, Rogers QR. Copper oxide is an ineffective source of copper in queen diets. In: Proceedings. Pet Food Forum, Chicago,
IL, 1995: 107-108.
CASE 6-4
Sudden Death in a Chihuahua
Patient Assessment
A three-year-old female Chihuahua was found dead one hour after being given 1.5 ml of a vitamin E preparation by intramuscu-
lar injection. The owner routinely administered the vitamin preparation twice yearly to all dogs of breeding age in his kennel. One
week earlier, a similar incident occurred with a two-year-old female Yorkshire terrier.The owner had purchased the vitamin E prod-
uct from the same veterinarian for several years. The Chihuahua and the vitamin E preparation were delivered to a diagnostic lab-
oratory for examination.
At necropsy, the lungs were wet, glistening and mottled pink. White foam was found in the trachea and bronchi. All other inter-
nal organs appeared normal. Histopathologic examination of the lungs showed congested capillaries, perivascular edema and abun-
dant proteinaceous fluid in the alveolar lumina. Liver and kidney specimens from the dog contained 12.9 and 12.1 mg selenium/kg,
respectively (normal values <3 mg/kg).
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
No food was available for evaluation. When contacted, the veterinarian suggested that the bottle of vitamin preparation might also
143
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 142 ---
contain selenium. Selenium had been added to a bottle of vitamin E intended for use in calves, but the mixture had not been dis-
pensed. The veterinarian was concerned that the bottle might have been sold inadvertently to the owner of the dog.
Two liquid phases, one oily and the other watery, were visible in the vitamin preparation bottle. The water-base liquid from the
bottle contained 5,317 mg selenium/l. Subcutaneous tissue at the injection site contained 129 mg of selenium/kg. The calculated
dose of selenium that had been administered to the dog was 2.5 mg/kg.The minimal lethal dose of selenium administered by intra-
muscular injection in dogs is 2.0 mg/kg.
Comments
Selenium toxicosis in cattle, sheep, horses, swine and poultry has been documented and usually develops as a subacute to chronic
disease resulting from ingestion of seleniferous plants or feeds that contain high concentrations of selenium because of errors in
ration formulation. Lesions of subacute to chronic selenium toxicosis have also been produced in dogs by long-term parenteral sele-
nium administration. Acute selenium toxicosis causes increased vascular permeability, which is manifested as hemorrhages and
edema in many tissues.
Bibliography
Janke BH. Acute selenium toxicosis in a dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 1989; 195: 1114-1115.
CASE 6-5
Cervical Rigidity in a Cat
Patient Assessment
A 10-year-old, castrated domestic shorthair cat weighing 7 kg was examined for lethargy, decreased appetite and weight loss of sev-
eral months’ duration. Weight loss of 2 kg over the preceding 12 months was evident from the medical record.
The cat appeared depressed, had a matted, unkempt coat and extended its cervical region and held its head low and directly in
front of its body.The cat was afebrile, obese and dehydrated. On palpation, the cervical region was rigidly extended with tense mus-
culature. A hard mass was palpable in the midcervical region. The rigidly extended neck was the only neurologic abnormality.
Evaluation included a complete blood count (mild leukocytosis with mature neutrophilia), serum biochemistry analysis (mild
hyperglycemia and hypercholesterolemia), feline leukemia virus antigen test (negative) and cervical and thoracic radiographs.
Radiography revealed a bone-dense, cervical mass ventral to the C1-C2 intervertebral space. Much of the normal vertebral archi-
tecture appeared to be obliterated and the trachea and soft tissues were deviated ventrally and laterally. Thoracic radiography
revealed ventral, bony proliferations extending from thoracic vertebrae T2 through T7. Marked bony proliferation was evident along
the sternum and several of the costal cartilages.
The cat’s serum vitamin A concentration was markedly high (315 µg/dl, normal 20 to 80 µg/dl).
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
The cat was fed a commercial dry cat food ad libitum supplemented with fresh beef liver daily.
Treatment and Feeding Plan
A tentative diagnosis of hypervitaminosis A was made based on the dietary history, clinical signs and radiographic lesions.The daily
liver supplementation was considered the source of the excess dietary vitamin A.The cat was given a single intramuscular injection
of dexamethasone and an oral analgesic was prescribed. The owner was advised to discontinue feeding beef liver and to feed only a
balanced commercial cat food. The owner was further advised to encourage the cat to eat with hand feeding.
Reassessment
Six months later, the cat was euthanatized for reasons unrelated to the hypervitaminosis A. The cat had been eating fairly well,
although its stiff-necked posture remained.
Bibliography
Goldman AL. Hypervitaminosis A in a cat. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 1992; 200: 1970-1972.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
144
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 143 ---
CASE 6-6
Vomiting and Anorexia in a German Shepherd Mixed-Breed Dog
Patient Assessment
A five-year-old, 10.6-kg, neutered female German shepherd mix was examined after three days of vomiting, anorexia and lethar-
gy.The owners reported the dog was allowed free access to the neighborhood, which included a radiator machine shop where chole-
calciferol-based rodenticides were used. The dog appeared depressed and moderately dehydrated.
Abnormal laboratory findings included moderate hypercalcemia, mild azotemia, proteinuria and isosthenuria.These results sug-
gested vitamin D3 toxicosis.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
No dietary history was available.
Treatment and Feeding Plan
Treatment consisted of intravenous 0.9% saline solution, diuretics, salmon calcitonin and corticosteroids. Hypercalcemia persisted
throughout hospitalization. Further diagnostic testing did not identify a cause for persistent hypercalcemia. After seven days of hos-
pitalization, the dog improved markedly and was discharged to the owners’ care. Oral prednisone (at tapering dosages) and a vet-
erinary therapeutic food formulated for renal patients were given at home.
Reassessment
The dog was evaluated several times during the next four weeks and appeared normal despite persistent hypercalcemia. The dog
became normocalcemic five weeks after discharge from the hospital and remained normocalcemic when examined at two and three
months.
Bibliography
Livezey KL, Dorman DC, Hooser SB, et al. Hypercalcemia induced by vitamin D3 toxicosis in two dogs. Canine Practice 1991;
16: 26-32.
CASE 6-7
Subcutaneous Nodules in a Young Cat
Patient Assessment
A five-month-old female domestic shorthair cat was examined for depression, anorexia, firm nodular subcutaneous fat in the groin
region and abdominal hyperesthesia of one week’s duration.The cat was normally docile and tractable but began to resist being han-
dled and petted. Body condition was normal (3/5).
Hematologic abnormalities included a neutrophilic leukocytosis and a normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia.
Urinalysis and fecal examination results were normal. Biopsy specimens were obtained from the affected subcutaneous tissue. The
biopsy specimens were firm, nodular and brownish-orange when examined grossly. Serosanguineous fluid oozed from the biopsy
sites. Histopathologic examination revealed pyogranulomatous panniculitis, ceroid pigment and multifocal areas of fat necrosis and
mineralization.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
Since weaning, the cat had only been fed sardines, anchovies and mackerel free choice.
Treatment and Feeding Plan
A diagnosis of pansteatitis was made based on the dietary history and histopathologic lesions.Treatment included α-tocopherol (50
mg/kg body weight) once daily per os for two months and prednisolone for 15 days in a decreasing dosage schedule. A fish-free,
complete and balanced moist cat food was offered. Because the cat was anorectic and unaccustomed to commercial cat food, it was
initially force-fed.
145
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 144 ---
Reassessment
Marked clinical improvement occurred within one week and the cat appeared clinically normal within one month.
Comments
Vitamin E protects cells against lipid peroxidation. α-tocopherol appears to localize within cell membranes to prevent or inhibit
initiation of lipid peroxidation. Animals fed oily fish and fish oils containing high levels of unsaturated fat require greater amounts
of vitamin E to limit fat oxidation.
Bibliography
Koutinas AF, Miller WH, Kritsepi M, et al. Pansteatitis (steatitis,“yellow fat disease”) in the cat: A review article and report of four
spontaneous cases. Veterinary Dermatology 1993; 3: 101-106.
CASE 6-8
Hemorrhagic Diathesis in a Group of Kittens
Patient Assessment
A group of adult intact female cats and their kittens were involved in an AAFCO feeding trial to establish nutritional adequacy for
gestation, lactation and growth. Necropsy of four kittens that died during the feeding trial revealed hepatic or GI hemorrhages.
Fourteen of the surviving kittens were divided into two groups. Blood samples were taken on Days 1, 3, 4 and 6. After the Day 3
blood samples were taken, seven of the kittens were injected subcutaneously with a vitamin K preparation (200 mg K1), and the
other seven were left untreated. Clotting times were determined for each sample.
The mean clotting time for kittens not receiving vitamin K treatment was 50 ± 9 seconds (values for normal kittens 22 ± 0.1 sec-
onds). Mean clotting times for kittens receiving treatment decreased significantly from 59 ± 10 seconds for Days 1 and 3 to 22 ±
0.4 seconds for Days 4 and 6.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
Queens and kittens were fed a commercial feline food formulated primarily from tuna, free choice. Individual food intake measure-
ments were not available for the kittens because they were group housed for the AAFCO feeding protocol.
Feeding Plan
Further studies using purified diets did not identify the specific cause of vitamin K deficiency in kittens eating this fish-based food.
These studies led to a recommendation that pet food companies include a supplemental source of vitamin K in moist fish-based
foods for cats.
Bibliography
Strieker MJ, Morris JG, Feldman BF, et al. Vitamin K deficiency in cats fed commercial fish-based diets. Journal of Small Animal
Practice 1996; 37: 322-326.
CASE 6-9
Weight Loss in a Group of Cats
Patient Assessment
Twenty-eight cats in a humane shelter in England developed lethargy, a mild decrease in food consumption and weight loss.
Analysis of blood samples taken from three of the cats revealed a normocytic, normochromic anemia.
Three days after the onset of clinical signs,13 of the cats rapidly lost body condition and developed an uncoordinated gait.Within
eight to 12 hours, these cats developed ventriflexion of the head and had fully dilated pupils with no light reflex. Five of the cats
subsequently developed seizures and died despite treatment with anticonvulsant drugs. A diagnosis of thiamin deficiency was made
based on necropsy results.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
146
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 145 ---
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
The cats were fed a commercial moist cat food for six months.The food was not a complete and balanced product but was designed
as a “complementary” food to be mixed with other complete dry foods.Two different lots of the moist food contained 0.56 and 0.04
mg thiamin/kg food. Assuming the food contained 75% water and had a metabolizable energy content of 1.25 kcal/g as fed, the
food should contain at least 1.25 mg/kg food of thiamin for kittens and 0.5 mg/kg food of thiamin for adult cats.
Treatment and Feeding Plan
The other severely affected cats were treated with intravenous fluids and intramuscular injections of vitamin B complex for five days.
These cats responded to therapy within 12 hours and were clinically normal five days later. No other cases have occurred since the
humane shelter switched to a complete and balanced moist cat food.
Bibliography
Davidson MG. Thiamin deficiency in a colony of cats. Veterinary Record 1992; 130: 94-97.
Finke MD. Alpo Viewpoints in Veterinary Medicine 1993; 3(1).
CASE 6-10
Skin and Hair Disorders in a Group of Kittens
Patient Assessment
Twenty female kittens were involved in a feeding trial to evaluate dietary phosphorus requirements. The kittens were eight weeks
old at the beginning of the trial. After eating the experimental food for 11 weeks, most kittens developed dried secretions around
the eyes, mouth, nose and feet, focal dermatitis of the lips near the canine teeth, alopecia along the back, neck and tail, achro-
motrichia, dull fur and a brownish appearance of the skin. Growth of the kittens was not impaired. Results of hemograms and uri-
nalyses were normal.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
The food was a purified diet that contained dried egg whites, fish meal, beef tallow, corn oil, glucose, cooked starch, cellulose, tau-
rine, vitamins and minerals. Food and demineralized water were provided free choice.
Feeding Plan
A tentative diagnosis of biotin deficiency was made based on the dietary history and clinical signs. The biotin content of the food
was increased from 0.066 mg/kg to 3.0 mg/kg of food.
Reassessment
The kittens were markedly improved after eating the biotin-supplemented food for 10 weeks. Serum biotin concentrations of kit-
tens fed unsupplemented food was about one-fifth of that of adult female cats fed a commercial complete and balanced dry cat
food. Serum biotin concentrations responded to increased biotin intake.
Comments
Biotin deficiency induced by avidin in raw egg whites is a classic example of vitamin deficiency in experimental nutrition. Avidin
is a glycoprotein that irreversibly binds biotin and renders it unavailable. Biotin deficiency was an unwanted side effect in this group
of research cats due to egg whites in the formulation. The researchers ordered ovalbumin expecting to receive a purified fraction of
egg protein. However, they received dried total egg whites, which contained avidin.
Bibliography
Pastoor FJH, Van Herck H, Van’t Klooster ATh, et al. Biotin deficiency in cats as induced by feeding a purified diet containing egg
white (expanded abstract). Journal of Nutrition 1991; 121: S73-S74.
147
Minerals and Vitamins
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 146 ---
CASE 6-11
Cachexia in a Young Giant Schnauzer
Patient Assessment
A five-month-old female giant schnauzer was admitted for lethargy, depression and cachexia (body condition score 1/5). The dog
weighed 7.8 kg and was 47 cm high at the shoulder. It had gained no weight in the previous eight weeks. The dog’s four normal
female littermates weighed 20.5 to 22.5 kg and were 48 to 52 cm high at the shoulder.
Hematologic abnormalities included chronic nonregenerative anemia and neutropenia. Peripheral blood smears revealed marked
erythrocyte anisocytosis and poikilocytosis, occasional hypersegmented neutrophils and large platelets. Analysis of bone marrow
aspirates revealed decreased to normal cellularity with adequate iron stores. Serum iron and total iron binding capacity were nor-
mal. Serum biochemistry analyses were within normal limits for age-matched controls.
Intestinal maldigestion and malabsorption were ruled out based on normal GI contrast radiography, normal absorption of starch
and fat and normal serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity. Normal hepatic function was documented by ammonia tolerance and BSP
retention tests.
A urine sample was submitted for metabolic screening. Analysis revealed methylmalonic aciduria, which is a sign of vitamin B12
deficiency. Two serum samples had vitamin B12 concentrations of 21 and 36 pg/ml (values for normal dogs 209 to 483 pg/ml).
Results of a test to measure intestinal absorption of an orally administered dose of vitamin B12 were suboptimal.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
The puppy was fed a variety of homemade and commercial dog foods free choice, supplemented with an oral liquid hematinic.
Treatment and Feeding Plan
Vitamin B12 (1 mg) was administered intramuscularly once daily for seven days. A complete and balanced commercial dry growth
dog food was offered free choice.
Reassessment
Within 12 hours of the vitamin B12 injection, the puppy became bright and alert and developed a voracious appetite. Two weeks
after treatment, the puppy had gained 7 kg; six weeks after treatment the puppy weighed 25 kg. Reticulocytosis occurred five days
after parenteral vitamin B12 therapy was started. Neutrophil counts increased within 10 days and all hematologic abnormalities
resolved within two months. The dog remained clinically normal when given 1 mg vitamin B12 intramuscularly every four to five
months.
Subsequent testing of this puppy’s mother documented an inborn error of vitamin B12 metabolism leading to selective vitamin
B12 malabsorption. Inherited selective malabsorption of vitamin B12 has been described in other giant schnauzer puppies and in
a cat.
Bibliography
Fyfe JC, Jezyk PF, Giger U, et al. Inherited selective malabsorption of vitamin B12 in giant schnauzers. Journal of the American
Animal Hospital Association 1989; 25: 533-539.
Vaden SL, Wood PA, Ledley FD, et al. Cobalamin deficiency associated with methylmalonic acidemia in a cat. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 1992; 200: 1101-1103.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
148
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 147 ---
INTRODUCTION
Oxidation is characterized by the loss of electrons,which results
in an increase in positive or a decrease in negative charges on an
atom. Usually, in biologic systems this occurs by the loss of one
or two electrons by transfer to another atom, which accepts the
electron(s) into its orbit, resulting in a more stable state.
Conversely, reduction of an atom is the gain of electrons. A
substance that donates electrons (i.e., becomes oxidized) to
another substance is a reducing agent and one that accepts elec-
trons (i.e., becomes reduced) is an oxidizing agent. Oxidizing
agents are always reduced in a reaction, whereas reducing
agents are always oxidized. Redox reactions occur when oxida-
tion and reduction take place in the same chemical equation
between two substances. In general, the balance of this poten-
tial energy equation is a measure of the ease with which a mol-
ecule gives up an electron compared to its willingness to accept
an electron in relation to the hydrogen half-cell equation devel-
oped by Nernst.
An antioxidant is any substance, that when present in low
concentrations compared with those of an oxidizable sub-
strate, significantly delays or prevents oxidation of that sub-
strate (i.e., it prevents oxidation) (Halliwell, 2002). Thus,
antioxidants may preserve the structural integrity and func-
tion of biologic molecules in cells. However, this concept may
be too simplistic because some cellular signaling pathways
appear to depend on redox chemistry to manifest “normal”
biologic function.
Free radicals are unstable atoms (e.g., oxygen, nitrogen)
with at least one unpaired electron in the outermost shell.
Oxygen free radicals (also called reactive oxygen species or
ROS) will be used as the prototypical molecule for this chap-
ter (Figure 7-1).
An unpaired electron creates a thermodynamically unstable
situation; therefore, the molecule will either attempt to gain
(reduction) or lose (oxidation) an electron to achieve thermo-
dynamic stability.Thus, a free radical may act as either an oxi-
dizing or reducing agent depending on its thermodynamic
propensity for stability. For example, superoxide (O2-) is a
normal byproduct of cellular respiration. Thermodynamically,
superoxide attempts to lose an electron to become oxygen and
eventually water by a hydrogen peroxide intermediate.
Alternatively, the hydroxyl radical (OH) strongly prefers to
gain an electron (i.e., oxidize other molecules) to achieve its
OH- configuration. The chemistry of free radical reactions
depends not only on which free radical species is generated in
vivo but also where the molecule is generated within the cell.
For example, a highly reactive free radical produced in mito-
chondria is unlikely to diffuse into the cytoplasm. A less reac-
tive species, however, such as hydrogen peroxide may diffuse
into the cytoplasm before it engages chemically in a redox
reaction.
Redox and free radical chemistry reactions may occur direct-
ly or be catalyzed by other molecules, metals or proteins acting
Chapter
7
Antioxidants
Steven C. Zicker
相关研究者
“Scientists now believe that free radicals are causal factors 
in nearly every known disease, from heart disease to arthritis 
to cancer to cataracts. In fact, radicals are a major culprit 
in the aging process itself.”
Lester Packer
VetBooks.ir


