--- PAGE 221 ---
INTRODUCTION
Each year more than 24 million Americans are affected by
foodborne illnesses such as salmonellosis, botulism and staphy-
lococcal food poisoning (Ensminger et al, 1995). In people,
both identified and undocumented pathogens likely cause 76
million cases of foodborne illness, 323,000 hospitalizations and
5,200 deaths annually (Mead et al, 1999). Luckily, the typical-
ly affected person often improves in 24 hours and has little
more than an upset stomach. Likewise, domesticated pets can
become ill from ingesting contaminated food. Most animal
feedstuffs including spoiled foods such as garbage and carrion
are rich in the nutrients needed to support rapid microbial col-
onization (Coppock and Mostrom, 1986). This phenomenon
occurs quickly because most bacteria have the ability to double
their number every 30 minutes under favorable moisture and
temperature conditions.
Microbes of all shapes and sizes are everywhere in our envi-
ronment. Foods can be contaminated at any stage of produc-
tion, starting in the field and ending with storage in the home.
The time between the harvesting of pet food ingredients, food
handling and preparation in the home and consumption of the
final product provides multiple opportunities for microbial
populations to proliferate. Microbial growth can result in either
food spoilage or risk of foodborne illness.The current methods
of food processing and preservation simply forestall the final
outcome: spoilage. The earlier in the food production cycle the
contamination occurs, the more widespread the outbreak.
Foodborne diseases (Figure 11-1) can be divided into two
types: 1) food infections (usually bacterial) and 2) food intoxi-
cation (microbial toxicoses) (Ensminger et al, 1995). Food
infections such as salmonellosis and salmon disease
(Neorickettsia helminthoeca) result from ingestion of infectious
microbial cells that invade the host’s tissues, and after an appro-
priate incubation period, produce the disease. Because it takes
time for these cells to replicate to pathogenic numbers, clinical
disease in food infections does not become evident until at least
12 to 24 hours after ingestion.
Food intoxications do not depend on the ingestion of viable
cells, but result from ingestion of a food that already contains a
microbial toxin. Because cell replication is not required, the
signs of food poisoning appear rapidly, sometimes in less than
one hour after ingestion. The term “food poisoning” is often
incorrectly used as a synonym for foodborne illness or any ill-
ness thought to be food related.
CLINICAL IMPORTANCE
When a pet exhibits signs of gastrointestinal (GI) disease, the
owner often concludes that food must be the culprit. In the
past, when pets relied on table foods, carrion, garbage and
improperly cooked pet foods for sustenance, this conclusion
would have been credible (Galton, 1955; Thornton, 1972).
Chapter
11
Food Safety
E. Phillip Miller
Neil W. Ahle
Mary C. DeBey
“Do not eat any detestable thing . . . 
Do not eat anything you find already dead.”
Deuteronomy 14: 3, 21
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 222 ---
Today, foodborne disease in household pets is rare (Dillon,
1986). The 1993-1994 report of the American Association of
Poison Control Centers (AAPCC) indicated that of the
116,432 dog and 19,489 cat poisoning cases reported, food-
borne illnesses accounted for only 0.11 and 0.13%, respectively
(Table 11-1) (Hornfeldt and Murphy, 1998). However, food-
borne illness is still a common disease in the United States rac-
ing greyhound industry (Fenwick, 1996).
The low incidence of foodborne illnesses in domestic pets
can be attributed to two primary changes in feeding practices.
First, most pets in developed countries depend totally on
commercial pet foods to meet their nutritional needs. More
than 90% of the pet owners in the United States purchase
commercial pet foods for their pets (Lund et al, 1996).
Although these figures are lower for the United Kingdom and
Europe, the majority of pet owners in those geographic
regions also feed commercial pet foods (Pet Food
Manufacturers Association, 1994).
Second, present-day commercial pet foods are much safer
than in the past. Modern pet foods are not composed of a sin-
gle ingredient, but are formulated from multiple ingredients
including grains, meats, meat by-products, vegetables, eggs,
dairy products, fish and other added nutrients.The use of many
and varied ingredients tends to dilute any contamination that
might occur in a particular commodity or ingredient.
Commercial pet food manufacturers commonly use manufac-
turing techniques such as extrusion and retorting to produce
heat levels sufficient to destroy many pathogens and heat-labile
toxins (Dziezak, 1989; Lopez, 1987). Improved packaging
materials and a better knowledge of proper warehousing also
help to protect raw materials and finished products from moist
conditions and possible contamination during storage.
Furthermore, manufacturers use sensitive analytical techniques
to verify that ingredients and final products are high quality and
free of contaminants.The value of these efforts is supported by
a study in which researchers analyzed 35 dog and 17 cat foods
and found that most were remarkably free of toxic contami-
nants (Mumma et al, 1986).
REGULATION OF COMMERCIAL 
PET FOOD
To ensure safety, pet foods and individual pet food ingredients
are regulated by several governmental agencies in addition to
meeting manufacturer’s quality control and storage standards.
In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) regulates foods and ingredients that are shipped across
state or international boundaries under the authority of the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) (Super-
intendent of Documents, 2004; Van Houweling et al, 1977;
Price et al, 1993). Section 402 of the FFDCA states that
foods, including pet foods, shall be considered adulterated
when they contain an added substance that may render the
food injurious to health. Section 406 of the FFDCA empow-
ers the Secretary of Health and Human Services to promul-
gate regulations and tolerances that limit the quantity of con-
taminants, such as mycotoxins. Additionally, sections 501, 505
and 512 of the FFDCA authorize the FDA control over the
use of veterinary drugs. As part of the drug approval process,
the FDA can set the conditions of drug use in animal feeds.
The use levels established for veterinary drugs prevent exces-
sive drug residues in meat, milk and other by-products from
food-producing animals that may be used as ingredients in pet
foods. The FDA and the Association of American Feed
Control Officials (AAFCO) publish annually the approved
animal drug levels in feeds along with the species for which the
drug is approved (Superintendent of Documents, 2005;
AAFCO, 2007).
The threat of terrorism to the nation’s food supply has also
prompted expansion of the federal role. The Federal
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
226
Table 11-1. Causes of poisonings in dogs and cats.*
Substance
Total cases (%)
Drugs
25.0
Insecticides
19.6
Plants
12.1
Miscellaneous/unknown
8.9
Rodenticides
8.4
Cleaning products
5.9
Cosmetics
2.9
Hydrocarbons
2.9
Foreign bodies
2.8
Chemicals
2.7
Fertilizers
2.2
Food
1.7
Herbicides
1.6
Paints
1.6
Bites/stings
1.2
Heavy metals
0.5
*Adapted from Hornfeldt CS, Murphy MJ. 1990 Report of the
American Association of Poison Control Centers: Poisonings in
Animals. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 1992; 200: 1077-1080. 
Figure 11-1. Classification of foodborne illnesses.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 223 ---
Government has the authority under the Public Health
Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Act of
2002 (i.e., the Bioterrorism Act) to administratively detain food
items that may present a threat of serious adverse health conse-
quences or death to people or animals. The Act also authorizes
enforcement actions that may be taken against perishable foods
subject to a detention order.
A tolerance is a codified legal regulation whereas action and
advisory levels constitute nonbinding FDA guidelines that
the agency uses in exercising its enforcement discretion.
Instead of a tolerance, the FDA may choose to issue either an
action or an advisory level for some unnatural additives. All
three are considered maximum allowable levels, but an action
level is generally supported by more definitive safety data than
is an advisory level. Therefore, some circumstances may elicit
enforcement action at levels below an action or advisory level
whereas others may not, even when an action or advisory level
has been exceeded.
The FDA does not set tolerances for pesticides; instead these
fall under the jurisdiction of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) by the authority of the FFDCA and
the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act
(Superintendent of Documents, 1995). The EPA establishes
and publishes pesticide tolerances for the various plant and ani-
mal commodities in 40 CFR 180. These tolerances are devel-
oped by combining the results of field trials and laboratory ani-
mal toxicity testing (NRC, 1993). The United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) and FDA are then jointly
responsible for enforcing the pesticide tolerances.
For contaminants not covered by a tolerance, an action level
or advisory level, the limit remains theoretically at zero.
However, present day analytical methods have become so sen-
sitive that minuscule amounts can be detected. Fortunately, the
FDA has discretionary power when a contaminant is detected
at a low level not considered to be a safety concern.
In Europe, the regulation of intentional additives (e.g., vita-
mins and minerals) and unintentional additives (e.g., pesticides,
drug residues and metals) falls under the authority of the
European Union (EU) (Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food, 1995). Control measures are implemented on a national
basis and can be stricter but never more permissive than the EU
legislation. Non-EU foreign countries regulate pet food safety
with a variety of internal regulations and policies.
Most regulatory agencies, both domestic and international,
use monitoring programs to maintain surveillance over pet food
products. Specifically, in the United States, the FDA monitors
pet food and individual pet food ingredients for pesticides,
mycotoxins and heavy metals as part of its Feed Contaminants
Program (Van Houweling et al, 1977).
Intrastate pet foods are under less federal scrutiny, with pri-
mary regulation left to state and local officials.This relationship
has created concern that unsuitable food components, most
notably mycotoxin-contaminated grains, may be used inadver-
tently (Nicholson, 1986). In addition, such products are often
pelleted instead of extruded; therefore, processing temperatures
may not be sufficient to kill bacteria and inactivate heat-labile
toxins. Both factors tend to increase the risk of foodborne dis-
ease in locally produced foods.
The risk of litigation also encourages pet food manufacturers
to be diligent in maintaining high product quality standards.
Under tort claims law, all products offered for sale to the pub-
lic contain an implied warranty (The American Law Institute,
1965). The law specifically provides “that a person who sells a
product in a defective condition unreasonably dangerous to the
user or consumer or his property is liable for the physical harm
the product causes . . .” News programs frequently report large
verdicts against manufacturers of human food products because
of the harm allegedly caused by their products (Taylor, 1996).
Animal feed and pet food manufacturers have also been caught
up in this trend. Procedural breakdowns or oversights during
production or storage can have a catastrophic effect on profits
or even company viability. Mycotoxin litigation alone cost the
pet food industry an estimated $7 million in the early 1990s
(McCoy, 1996). Recent problems with mycotoxin contamina-
tion had financial repercussions and severely damaged the rep-
utation of companies involved (Industry News, 1995;
Anonymous. FDA Recall, 2005). Such experiences have made
it necessary for manufacturers to devote extensive resources to
documenting product quality.
HOME-PREPARED FOODS
The use of home-prepared pet foods also has clinical relevance
to foodborne disease. Meat and eggs produced for human con-
sumption and used to prepare homemade pet foods are contam-
inated with microbes (Notermans et al,1995; Fenlon et al,1996;
Remillard, 2005). Research indicates that many people are care-
less about cross-contamination during food preparation at home
(Patil et al, 2005). If breeders and pet owners use grocery store
ingredients that have been stored properly, heat foods to tem-
peratures sufficient to destroy pathogens and prepare amounts
that are readily consumed, the potential for foodborne illness in
the pet is expected to be similar to that for people in the same
household. Some health-conscious pet owners forgo commer-
cial foods and, instead, prepare foods for their pets daily. These
owners must be fastidious and very careful about preparing and
storing their pets’food,and truly be committed to the long-term
maintenance of proper hygiene and preparation methods.
Otherwise, the best method to lessen the risk of foodborne ill-
ness is to feed the pet a high-quality commercial pet food man-
ufactured by a company that uses state of the art quality control
procedures. There are no such requirements or regulations for
pet food manufacturers to do so and most do not; however,there
are a few world-wide manufacturers that maintain self-imposed
rigorous product quality control procedures.
RAW INGREDIENT DIETS
Feeding raw ingredient diets (commercially available or home-
made) to household pets has become increasingly popular.
227
Food Safety
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 224 ---
Some advocates of raw food claim that dogs should be fed raw
meat because their wild canine ancestors survived and present
day relatives survive on uncooked food.There is no evidence to
support dogs evolved from jackals, foxes or coyotes (Wayne,
1993). Comparisons of mitochondrial DNA indicate that dogs
most likely descended from wolves. However, the mitochondr-
ial DNA patterns of modern dogs and wolves are distinctly dif-
ferent, and there is no single wolf ancestor that is common to
all dogs (Semyenova et al, 2002). No compelling scientific evi-
dence based on evolution supports statements that dogs should
eat uncooked food as did wild canids. Claims that dogs are car-
nivores, rather than omnivores, are likely due to confusion of
taxonomy (Carnivora) with feeding behavior (carnivore). Dogs
belong to the order Carnivora, but their eating habits are those
of an omnivore (Chapter 12). Panda bears, for example, are her-
bivores in their feeding behavior, but are included in the order
Carnivora taxonomically.
Advocates of raw food emphasize the importance of ingredi-
ents (Billinghurst, 1993; Schultze, 1998; Volhard and Brown,
2000) with less emphasis on nutrient balance. Advocates claim
the nutrients from commercial moist or extruded pet foods are
less or not available or even absent (Pottenger, 1939;
Billinghurst, 1993; Schultze, 1998; Volhard and Brown, 2000)
when compared with feeding raw ingredients. Although no
digestibility studies of a complete raw diet have been published
to date, average apparent digestibilities of nutrients in commer-
cial pet food have been published. Opponents to feeding raw
food point out that some nutrients actually are more readily
available from cooked ingredients (Zia-ur-Rehman and
Salariya, 2005), and that overall nutrient availability and balance
are more significant than for certain individual ingredients.a
Advocates of feeding raw food report coat and/or dental ben-
efits (Pottenger and Simonson, 1939; Billinghurst, 1993;
Schultze, 1998; Volhard and Brown, 2000) based upon empir-
ical and anecdotal evidence (Billinghurst, 1993; Schultze, 1998;
Volhard and Brown, 2000); however, some who recommend
raw meat recognize the limits of using such evidence (Silver,
2004).The high fat content (>50%) of raw food diets compared
to that found in most dry kibble (<30%) often can account for
owners’ reports of improvement in the appearance of their pet’s
coat (Dunn, 1999). The incidence of periodontitis and frac-
tured teeth, however, increased with age in 67 dogs eating raw
animal carcasses with bones in a dental health study (Robinson
and Gorrel, 1997). None of the homemade and commercially
available raw food diets analyzed were appropriate for long-
term feeding (Freeman and Michel, 2001, 2001a), which is
consistent with the clinical experience of one editor of this text-
book (RLR).To date, no scientific evidence exists that demon-
strates raw food diets provide additional or exceptionally unique
nutrients that cannot be obtained from cooked food.
Professionals at zoos and racing greyhound kennels, who
have historically fed raw meat, recognize the potential for con-
tamination and attempt to decrease risks of foodborne illness.
Raw meat may make up 50 to 75% of the food consumed by
racing greyhounds in the United States (Chengappa et al,
1993). Sporadic fatalities and contamination of the environ-
ment with Salmonella enterica have occurred in greyhound facil-
ities in which raw meat was fed (Morley et al, 2006). Unlike
raw food advocates in the dog-racing industry, pet owners share
their household and food-preparation area with their pet. The
FDA “does not believe raw meat foods for animals are consis-
tent with the goal of protecting the public from significant
health risks, particularly when such products are brought into
the home and/or used to feed domestic pets.” Thus, the FDA
has drafted guidelines for companies selling raw meat diets to
pet owners (2000).
Often, pet owners will refer to the quality of their raw home-
made diet ingredients as “all natural,” “whole food” “or organ-
ic,” none of which decreases the potential for microbial con-
tamination. Numerous studies have demonstrated the presence
of bacterial pathogens in retail meat for human consumption
(Sinell H-J et al, 1984; Fenlon et al, 1996; Tamplin et al, 2001;
Duffy et al, 2001; Whyte et al, 2001; Zhao et al, 2001; White
et al, 2001; Villani et al, 2005; O’Keefe, 2005). Raw meat diets
prepared by pet owners fed to dogs and cats have been docu-
mented to contain pathogenic Yersinia enterocolitica 4/O:3,
Salmonella spp. and Escherichia coli O157:H7 (Fredriksson-
Ahoma et al, 2001; Joffe and Schlesinger, 2002; Freeman and
Michel, 2001; Chengappa et al, 1993). Commercially available
raw meat diets (beef, lamb, chicken and turkey), sampled over a
two-month period, cultured positive for non-type specific E.coli
and S. enterica (Strohmeyer et al, 2006). Of 25 commercial raw
meat diets (beef, lamb, quail, chicken and ostrich), 64% were
positive for E. coli and 20% were positive for Salmonella spp. In
addition, 20% were contaminated with Clostridium perfringens
and a toxigenic strain of C. difficile was isolated from one food
(Weese et al, 2005). Any claims that a finished pet food is
“human grade,” or any connotation that a pet food is derived
from raw ingredients “like, or similar to, what your own human
family members eat” is considered false and misleading under
current AAFCO rules and regulations.a
Advocates of feeding raw meat, bone and eggs claim that
pathogenic organisms in raw meat do not affect dogs and cats
due to the lower stomach pH and shorter GI transit times in
these species. Stomach pH and GI transit times are in fact sim-
ilar among people, dogs and cats and do not lower the risk to
pets. Dogs and cats succumb to foodborne pathogens and
exhibit clinical signs similar to those in people (Fredriksson-
Ahomaa et al, 2001; Gayle, 2003; Remillard and Wynn, 2005).
Neither freezing raw meat before feeding nor purchasing
freeze-dried commercial foods eliminates pathogens; freezing
and freeze-drying are ineffective means for killing bacteria. In
fact, both methods are used for long-term preservation of valu-
able stock bacterial cultures in laboratories. Grape seed extract
itself does not kill microorganisms and does not render meat
safer. The antimicrobial activity attributed to grapefruit seed
extract is merely due to the synthetic preservative agents added
to the product. Natural grape seed appears not to have antimi-
crobial activity (von Woedtke et al, 1999).
Opponents to feeding raw food point out that meat and egg
supplies for people are contaminated with microorganisms and
that feeding raw meat increases the likelihood of exposure of
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
228
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 225 ---
owners and pets to foodborne bacterial diseases (LeJeune and
Hancock, 2001). Advocates of raw food do not deny its poten-
tial health risks to pets (Volhard and Brown, 2000; Hofve and
Smith, 2001; Silver, 2004). Pet owners may not realize that
infected dogs shed bacteria capable of infecting people. Dogs
may be excreting Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp. or Y. ente-
rocolitica in their feces, yet remain clinically normal (LeJeune
and Hancock, 2001). Pets fed homemade raw meat diets shed
viable organisms in their feces. In one study, Salmonella spp.
were isolated from 80% of the raw meat and bone diets sam-
pled and in 30% of the stool samples from dogs consuming
those diets (Joffe and Schlesinger, 2002). Greyhounds fed raw
meats diets shed the same subspecies of Salmonella in their feces
as that found in their diets (Stone et al, 1993). Sled dogs were
subclinical shedders of Salmonella spp. when fed a contaminat-
ed diet (Cantor et al, 1997). Dogs infected with Campylobacter
spp. excrete organisms in their feces, but may remain clinically
normal (Hald and Madsen, 1997). However, serovars of
Campylobacter isolated from diarrheic dogs were the same as
those isolated from poultry carcasses fed to the dogs (Varga et
al, 1990). Therefore, pets fed contaminated raw meat diets are
a source of contamination to people and other pets in the same
household. Transmission of Salmonella infection from pets to
people in the same household has been documented (Morse et
al,1976; Sato et al,2000;Tauni and Osterlund,2000).Pet own-
ers feeding raw chicken necks and backs or other raw meat are
putting themselves, their family and their pet at increased risk
for exposure to Salmonella spp. Household transmission of
foodborne Y. entercolitica from dogs to people has been docu-
mented (Gutman et al, 1973). Exposure may occur either by
direct contact with food/utensils, or by contact with the con-
taminated environment shared between people and pets
(Sanchez et al, 2002).
A recent meta-analysis demonstrated that consumers engage
in risky behaviors regarding food handling. High-income indi-
viduals were less knowledgeable about food hygiene and per-
formed higher risk, cross-contamination practices more often
than other groups studied (Patil et al, 2005). Exposure to food-
borne illness due to ingestion of pathogens from undercooked
hamburger or eggs, raw chicken and work surfaces used to slice
raw vegetables is a continuous threat to people who prepare raw
foods for their pets (Hedberg, 2001). Safe handling of food and
feeding containers is of paramount importance for pet owners
who feed raw meat. Some people are unaware of any food safe-
ty issues because the raw meat used to feed their pet is some-
times derived from the same source as meats they use for their
own consumption. However, USDA product labels on meat
sold in grocery stores give clear warnings and cooking instruc-
tions to reduce the risk of foodborne illnesses. Foodborne path-
ogenic organisms may infect people handling contaminated
meat and egg products and products intended for pets (bones,
pig ears and treats) (Grimsrud, 1999).
Even advocates of feeding raw foods or ingredients admit that
people “extremely susceptible to infectious disease” should not
feed raw meat (Hofve and Smith, 2001). Individuals who clean
the cat’s litter box or pick up their dog’s stool should consider the
feces contaminated with viable pathogenic microbes.
Households with elderly persons who may be immunocompro-
mised should avoid raw food and soiled environments. Extra
precautions should be taken when persons (or other pets) in the
household have immunosuppressive (human immunodeficiency
virus, feline leukemia virus or feline immunodeficiency virus)
infections, are undergoing chemotherapy or being treated with
antiinflammatory medications. Additional caution should be
emphasized when young children are in the household and pet
food-oral or fecal-oral contamination is possible. Because chil-
dren are more susceptible than healthy adults,families with chil-
dren who crawl and those with children who play with the fam-
ily pet may decide to feed commercially prepared moist or
extruded foods to prevent foodborne illness in the child (Trevejo
et al, 2003). Veterinarians recommending commercial or home-
made foods containing raw meat or eggs have an ethical respon-
sibility to fully inform pet owners of the increased potential risk
of foodborne pathogens not only to the pet but the entire house-
hold (LeJeune and Hancock, 2001; Remillard, 2005).
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
The most important goal in dealing with a case of suspected
foodborne illness is to obtain an accurate diagnosis. However,
this may be difficult because many factors, including the pet
owner, can mislead the veterinarian. One must adhere stub-
bornly to the principles of a proper toxicologic investigation,
including the careful evaluation of information supplied by: 1)
the history, 2) clinical signs, 3) postmortem findings, 4) chem-
ical analyses and 5) laboratory animal tests (Osweiler et al,
1985). For live patients, an accurate diagnosis will aid in the ini-
tiation of specific treatments and preventive measures.The vet-
erinarian should also use preliminary information and clinical
signs to guide the history-taking process.
History
Although an adequate history is important in all clinical cases,
it is especially important when foodborne illness is suspected
because some of the critical facts in the case may be lacking. For
example, it may not be possible to obtain a sample of garbage
or a carrion source. Pet owners who often express the opinion
that food is to blame also complicate the history-taking process.
In such cases, veterinarians must be methodical if they are to
reach an unbiased and accurate diagnosis.
The natural starting place is the discussion with the pet
owner. First, ascertain when and what clinical signs first
appeared. From here, veterinarians can annotate the sequence
and relevant facts about the events that transpired before the
patient’s presentation. Aspects of the history that seem vague or
incomplete should be probed further. Facts that seem unrelated
should be noted for later consideration. For example, it is
important to know what day the neighborhood trash is left out
for pickup, especially if it was the day before the illness
occurred. The recent application of a pesticide to the premises
or yard, coupled with signs typical of pesticide toxicity, would
229
Food Safety
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 226 ---
be important, particularly if the pet owner, instead of a profes-
sional exterminator, had applied the pesticide. Exposure to
other toxicants in the pet’s environment, such as recent use of
certain cleaning chemicals, is always a distinct possibility and
should be thoroughly investigated. A run or hike in the woods
may allow the pet access to contaminated material containing
bacteria or mycotoxins that induce foodborne illness. The
AAPCC reported that home exposures are responsible for
91.6% of canine and 93.3% of feline poisonings (Hornfeldt and
Murphy, 1998). If pets are allowed to roam freely outdoors, the
scope of investigation must be expanded. Free-roaming animals
have access to pesticides, other toxic chemicals, poisoned bait,
trash, garbage and spoiled foods. Pets on farms and ranches
have an increased exposure to pesticides and agricultural chem-
icals.They also have the freedom to ingest animal feeds intend-
ed for other species that may contain feed additives such as
ionophores and organic arsenicals, which are toxic to pets.
These examples lend credence to the fact that one cannot
achieve an adequate history by allowing the pet owner to sim-
ply describe the events that preceded the illness. Instead, it is
imperative that the veterinarian take the initiative to tactfully
probe and query the pet owner for every piece of key informa-
tion. Most pet owners feel that such facts are irrelevant, and
others may refuse to admit that their pet would scavenge
garbage cans. Still others may even give incorrect information
to conceal their own negligence. All family members should be
included in these discussions if possible. This is a good time to
request that the pet owner bring the food in its container to the
hospital for testing. It is important that the entire food contain-
er be brought, not just a sample selected by the pet owner (to
be discussed later in the chapter).
Contamination of a commercial pet food will usually pro-
duce an epizootic of sick pets within a wide geographic area, as
exemplified by events in Europe and recently in the United
States. A popular brand of cat food was inadvertently contam-
inated with the food animal drug salinomycin, causing paraly-
sis and death in several hundred cats (Spillers Petfoods, 1996).
Toxic levels of aflatoxin in a commercial food led to numerous
reports of affected dogs (Derezynski et al, 2006; Stenske et al,
2006).Therefore, knowledge of this information can be used in
the diagnostic process. If other animals in the same household
are eating food from the same bag or container and remain
asymptomatic, then implication of the food is diminished, and
other possible causes should be investigated. Date codes on
bags or cans of food may be used by the manufacturer to link
illness of multiple pets in widely separated geographic areas.
The food is not a likely suspect if pets consuming food with the
same date code are not experiencing similar clinical signs.
However, even if it appears that the commercial food has
been exonerated in a wide geographic area, one should not end
the commercial food investigation because the pet owner may
have compromised the product’s integrity by improper storage
or usage. The veterinarian should contact the manufacturer to
determine if similar cases have been reported. Company tech-
nical personnel can also help the differential diagnostic process
by supplying key information about product testing, additional
areas of investigation and beneficial laboratory tests. Major pet
food companies frequently check raw ingredients for mycotox-
ins, mineral levels, heavy metals, pesticides, spoilage indicators,
peroxides and other substances as part of their quality control
and specifications for incoming raw materials.
Physical Examination
The physical examination of patients suspected to have a food-
borne illness should be thorough, just as for other diseases.
Although signs of GI disease may be obvious, one should also
be alert for other clinical signs such as cutaneous lesions or signs
that might signify central nervous system or hepatic disease
(Table 11-2). If possible, samples of vomitus and feces should
be obtained for laboratory testing. Veterinarians should also use
their own olfactory senses. Many toxicities impart unique odors
to the patient. For example, fishy breath emanating from a dog
known to be consuming a cereal-based dry dog food with no
added fish oil or fish meal would be noteworthy. Likewise, a
pesticide odor on a cat’s coat would be a significant observation.
Again, one cannot overemphasize the investigative prowess
that must be exercised in foodborne illness cases.
Another important reason for conducting a routine physical
examination is to evaluate the need for symptomatic treatment.
Patients may have signs such as dehydration, seizures or high
fever that require symptomatic or supportive treatment before
a final diagnosis is made.This determination is best made dur-
ing the physical examination. If emergency treatment is war-
ranted, consultation with a local veterinary school, state veteri-
nary diagnostic laboratory, hospital poison control center or the
American Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals may be
useful.The National Animal Poison Control Center (888-426-
4435) may also prove helpful.
Clinical Laboratory Testing
Clinical laboratory testing should be performed routinely in all
suspected foodborne illness cases. Many such illnesses are
short-lived so hematologic and serum biochemistry values may
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
230
Table 11-2. Clinical signs of selected foodborne illnesses.
Clinical signs 
Agents causing the foodborne illness
Vomiting/diarrhea
S. aureus, Salmonella spp.,
Neorickettsia spp., E. coli, B. cereus,
Yersinia spp., Campylobacter spp., bio-
genic amines, aflatoxins, vomitoxin,
cyclopiazonic acid, lead, arsenic, zinc,
cadmium
Liver disorders,
Aflatoxins, fumonisins, lead, arsenic,
jaundice
rubratoxin, Yersinia spp.
Blood disorders, e.g., 
Aflatoxins, Neorickettsia spp., lead, 
anemia, hemorrhages
onions, garlic, rubratoxin, 
cyclopiazonic acid, mycotoxins
CNS/nervous 
C. botulinum, fumonisins, penitrem A,
disturbances
lead, arsenic, mercury, chocolate
Kidney pathology
Ochratoxin, cyclopiazonic acid, E. coli,
lead, arsenic, mercury, cadmium,
chocolate, grapes/raisins
Skin lesions
E. coli, garlic, arsenic, cyclopiazonic
acid
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 227 ---
be within normal limits. However, clinical biochemistry values
may be invaluable in establishing the diagnosis and prognosis in
serious illnesses such as mycotoxicosis.
Vomitus, feces and urine should be collected, labeled, frozen
and tested for bacteria, viruses, biotoxins, metals, pesticides or
chemicals as deemed appropriate by discussions between the
veterinarian and laboratory testing personnel. The collection
and analysis of a urine sample is also important because many
toxic compounds are concentrated in urine. In fatal cases, organ
tissue samples, bile, urine and stomach and intestinal contents
should be collected during the postmortem examination.
Risk Factors
Individual factors such as age, species and state of health
influence susceptibility to foodborne illness. Young and old
animals are most susceptible. Debilitated and immunocom-
promised animals are more prone to foodborne illness. Dogs
are at higher risk than cats because they are more likely to for-
age spoiled foods (e.g., trash, garbage and carrion). The
AAPCC reported that dogs account for 75% of all animal
poisonings (Hornfeldt and Murphy, 1998). Historically, the
risk of foodborne illnesses in pets is increased when raw
ingredient diets are fed, during warm weather, during hunting
seasons, and around two holidays: Thanksgiving and
Christmas (Coppock and Mostrom, 1986).
Cats tend to be more discerning and fastidious in their eat-
ing habits. Cats may vomit because of subtle variations between
different batches of the same food. Slight changes in moisture
content or application of palatability enhancers can lead to
vomiting in cats. If a cat vomits after eating a recently opened
can or bag of a commercial product, but is otherwise healthy,
you may choose to try a food with a different date code before
concluding that the food is adulterated. If the cat is truly ill, and
you suspect the food, call the company to check for other
reports of illness in cats eating that product or a product with
the same date code. Reputable companies will want to know
about any problems.
The most important factors to consider in establishing risk
are the food source and the environment. Knowledge of these
factors will help quantify the patient’s exposure to other sources
of toxicants and microbial agents. If the pet owner feeds a com-
mercial pet food and follows label directions and proper storage
recommendations, the likelihood of foodborne illness is low.
However, if the same pet is allowed to roam freely outdoors,
then the risk of exposure to foodborne disease agents is
increased greatly. Home-prepared foods are riskier if owners do
not follow proper preparation and storage procedures. Animals
fed foods containing uncooked meat, eggs or offal are at much
greater risk for foodborne agents. In general, the risk of con-
tracting foodborne illness from various food sources increases as
follows (from least to greatest risk):
• Federally regulated canned pet foods
• Federally regulated dry pet foods
• Federally regulated semi-moist pet foods
• Individual homemade fresh foods
• Locally prepared commercial dry pet foods
• Mass-produced kennel foods
• Free access to garbage, trash and carrion.
The risk of contracting a foodborne agent from any of these
food sources can be markedly increased by improper storage of
the food. All of the effort that goes into selection of raw ingre-
dients, product manufacturing and choice of food or home
preparation is wasted if the pet owner fails to properly store the
food. Proper storage depends on control of three factors: 1)
temperature, 2) moisture and 3) availability of oxygen
(Ensminger et al, 1995). If these factors are controlled, com-
mercial canned products will have a shelf life of well over a year
and dry foods of at least six months.Therefore,risk is also influ-
enced by proper food storage.
Consumers should store dry food in the closed bag, at room
temperature if possible, and away from moisture (Chapter 8). If
the consumer puts the food in a plastic container, the bag itself
should be placed in the container to retain integrity of the prod-
uct and preserve the date code (Chapter 8).Opened cans of food
should be covered and immediately refrigerated for no longer
than specified by the manufacturer, usually three to five days.
Etiopathogenesis
The bacteria of major concern as potential causes of foodborne
illnesses in people include: C. perfringens, C. botulinum,
Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus, Salmonella spp., Listeria
spp., Yersinia spp., Aeromonas spp., C. jejuni, E. coli, Vibrio spp.,
Enterococcus faecalis, E. cloacae and Klebsiella ozaenae (Potter,
1992; Council for Agricultural Science and Technology, 1994).
These organisms also have the potential to cause disease in
pets. However, as stated previously, the prevalence of foodborne
disease is low in dogs and cats. The following discussion
involves the etiopathogenesis of bacteria and other agents that
can cause foodborne disease in pets.
Bacteria and Rickettsia
SALMONELLA SPECIES
Salmonellae are gram-negative, aerobic bacilli that are nor-
mally present in the intestinal tracts of many mammals, birds
and reptiles. Healthy adult dogs and cats are fairly resistant to
the pathogenic effects of salmonellae but serve as important
sources of infection for people and weak, debilitated animals. It
has been estimated that 36% of healthy dogs and 17% of
healthy cats harbor these organisms in their GI tracts (Green,
1995; Morse and Duncan, 1975).
The most common route of exposure is through ingestion of
fecal-contaminated food and water.The presence of salmonel-
lae in food or water indicates inadequate hygiene and improp-
er cooking. Racing greyhounds are frequently infected when
they consume foods largely composed of contaminated raw
meat and offal from rendering plants. Researchers who sam-
pled and cultured raw meat used in greyhound foods found
that 45% of the meat samples were contaminated with salmo-
nellae. S. typhimurium was the most commonly isolated
serotype (Chengappa et al, 1993). When racing greyhounds
ingest raw meat containing large numbers of cells, a clinical
enteritis syndrome termed “kennel sickness” or “blowout”
231
Food Safety
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 228 ---
results (Fenwick, 1996).
Salmonellae produce a heat-labile endotoxin, which is
responsible for their pathologic effects. Clinical syndromes can
be divided into gastroenteritis, bacteremia/toxemia and organ
localization. Infections can usually be treated successfully with a
combination of appropriate antibacterial drugs and supportive
treatment. Persistent carriers are common and can be a source of
human exposure. Proper cooking of foods and boiling water will
kill vegetative bacterial cells and inactivate the endotoxin.
CLOSTRIDIUM BOTULINUM
The heat-labile toxin of the gram-positive, anaerobic, spore-
forming bacterium C. botulinum causes botulism. These sapro-
phytic bacilli are commonly found in soil and as contaminants
in raw meat, carrion and vegetables. They are not considered
dangerous to man or animals unless allowed to grow under
anaerobic conditions in uncooked meats, improperly canned
foods and the carcasses of dead animals. Under anaerobic con-
ditions, C. botulinum produces the most potent biotoxin known
(Klassen and Eaton, 1993). This powerful exotoxin blocks the
release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Dogs are less sus-
ceptible to the effects of the toxin than people, but naturally
occurring botulism has occurred in dogs (Green, 1995;
Barsanti, 1984; Barsanti et al, 1978). Cats, previously thought
to be resistant to botulinum toxin, have also been found to be
susceptible. Eight cats fed pelican carrion contracted the dis-
ease, and four died during the course of the illness.Toxigenic C.
botulinum type C bacteria were found in the stomach of one cat
and in the pelican muscle (Elad et al, 2004). Clinical signs can
occur as early as 12 hours or as late as five to six days after the
exotoxin is ingested. The primary clinical sign is generalized
paralysis that starts in the posterior limbs and progresses to
quadriplegia.
Primary care consists of supportive treatment. Spontaneous
recovery will occur provided the dose of toxin ingested was
insufficient to severely affect vital functions, such as respiration.
Prevention can be achieved by heating foods before consump-
tion to either 80°C (176°F) for 30 minutes or 100°C (212°F) for
10 minutes (Ensminger et al, 1995).These heating protocols are
sufficient to destroy the heat-labile toxin of C. botulinum; how-
ever, any bacterial spores present will survive this procedure.
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS
The ubiquitous staphylococci are common inhabitants of the
skin and mucous membranes of man and other animals (Jawetz
et al, 1980). S. aureus is the most common cause of foodborne
illness in people. The typical GI signs result from a potent S.
aureus enterotoxin. Although S. aureus organisms are easily
killed by heat, their enterotoxin can withstand typical cooking
temperatures and even the canning process (Tatini, 1976).
Ingestion of about 25 µg of enterotoxin will produce nausea and
vomiting within two to four hours in people. Spontaneous
recovery occurs in 24 to 48 hours. Dogs and cats are reported
to be tolerant to staphylococcal enterotoxin and have remained
asymptomatic after administration of oral doses as high as 100
µg/kg body weight (Freer and Arbuthnott, 1986).b
ESCHERICHIA COLI
E. coli is a well-known pathogen of people. However, the
role of E. coli as a pathogen of dogs and cats has been unclear
(Burrows et al, 1995; Olson et al, 1985). E. coli, strain
O157:H7 has been involved in a number of outbreaks of
foodborne illnesses stemming from improperly cooked meat
purchased from fast-food restaurants (Potter, 1992).The same
strain has been incriminated in an unusual clinical syndrome
in racing greyhounds termed “Alabama rot” or “Greenetrack
disease” (Fenwick et al, 1995).This disease is characterized by
erythema, ulceration of the extremities and renal glomerular
pathology (Fenwick, 1996; Fenwick et al, 1995; Hertzke et al,
1995). No particular treatment has proved effective, but many
animals will recover with symptomatic treatment and good
nursing care.
BACILLUS CEREUS
B. cereus causes vomiting and diarrhea in people, but it is not
thought to pose a significant danger for foodborne illness in
animals (Turnbull and Kramer, 1991). At room temperature, B.
cereus flourishes, producing a potent endotoxin. The organism
is a ubiquitous, spore-forming aerobic saprophyte found in soil,
grains, cereal products and other foods (van Netten and
Kramer, 1992). As an example, it is commonly found in
uncooked rice (Ensminger et al, 1995). B. cereus has been found
as a common isolate in samples of dry pet food.c It has also
been isolated from food packaging paper and materials
(Vaisanen et al, 1992).
The standard heat used to manufacture pet foods is not
likely to destroy the spores of this organism. However, the
number of organisms isolated from pet food samples (<105
cells/g of food) is unlikely to cause foodborne disease in pets
unless the food is exposed to moisture and heat conditions
conducive to bacterial proliferation (van Netten and Kramer,
1992; Claus and Berkeley, 1986; Drobniewski, 1993).
Therefore, pet owners should be warned not to add water to
dry pet foods and leave them exposed to high ambient tem-
peratures for prolonged periods.
NEORICKETTSIA SPECIES
In dogs, Neorickettsia helminthoeca and N. elokominica, cause a
serious systemic infection known as salmon poisoning
(Breitschwerdt, 1995; Gorham and Foreyt, 1984). The disease
is transmitted by ingestion of raw salmon containing the vector,
a fluke named Nanophyetus salmincola.The fluke matures in five
to seven days and then attaches to the intestinal mucosa of the
host animal.The rickettsiae leave the fluke, invade the intestin-
al mucosa and enter the bloodstream to produce an acute sys-
temic infection.
Clinical signs include vomiting, hemorrhagic diarrhea, high
fever,
dehydration 
and 
peripheral 
lymphadenopathy.
Tetracycline therapy is the treatment of choice. Supportive
treatment with parenteral fluids is also indicated. The
anthelmintic preferred for elimination of the fluke is fenbenda-
zole. If timely treatment is not instituted, mortality can reach
50 to 90% (Burrows et al, 1995).
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
232
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 229 ---
Mycotoxins
Estimates suggest that one-quarter of the world’s annual food
crop is affected by mold metabolites called mycotoxins
(Mannon and Johnson, 1985). Produced by a wide variety of
saprophytic and pathologic fungi, they can be highly toxic
(Council for Agricultural Science and Technology, 1989).Toxic
syndromes range from mild GI discomfort and vomiting to an
acute fulminating episode with death. Long-term, low-level
exposure can produce vague signs such as chronic organ dam-
age (e.g., hepatic cirrhosis), immunosuppression and decreased
production or performance. Mycotoxins interfere with absorp-
tion of antioxidant compounds from food, and modulate activ-
ity of antioxidant enzyme systems in cells. Combinations of
mycotoxins may be more toxic than single mycotoxins (Surai
and Dvorska, 2005). Although cereal grains are most common-
ly associated with mycotoxins, a wide variety of foodstuffs
including cheeses, nuts, forages, fruits and even beer can be
contaminated (Council for Agricultural Science and
Technology, 1989).
Mycotoxin production occurs in the field and during har-
vesting, processing, transportation and storage. Stressors, such
as drought and insect damage, predispose crops to infestation
and mycotoxin production. Warm ambient temperatures and
high humidity also favor mycotoxin production. Some molds
thrive in cooler, wet conditions. Presence of mold, however,
does not necessarily mean mycotoxin production. The condi-
tions under which mycotoxins are formed are relatively narrow
when compared to conditions favorable to mold growth (Pitt,
2001). Some degree of mycotoxin production is unavoidable.
Mycotoxin content may be controlled through identification,
quantification and regulation. The genera of the three major
mycotoxin-producing fungi are Aspergillus, Fusarium and
Penicillium. Dietary supplementation with antioxidants proved
protective against the toxic effects of mycotoxins in various ani-
mal species (Surai and Dvorska, 2005).
AFLATOXINS
Aflatoxin, a mycotoxin produced by Aspergillus flavus or A.
parasiticus, can produce varying degrees of toxicity in birds and
mammals. Corn, peanuts, cottonseed and grains are potential
sources of aflatoxins in pet foods. Dogs and cats are among the
species most sensitive to the effects of aflatoxin, with LD50 val-
ues ranging from 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg (Newberne and Butler,
1969; Edds, 1973). Aflatoxin B1 is metabolized in the liver to
highly reactive intermediates that bind to DNA, disrupt tran-
scription and lead to abnormal cell proliferation, mutagenesis
and carcinogenesis. Aflatoxins also inhibit various enzymes
(Hocking, 2001). The net effect is decreased protein synthesis,
leading to hypoalbuminemia and a shortage of clotting factors.
The onset and severity of the clinical syndrome depend on
the dose and duration of exposure. In 1955, the canine disease
known as hepatitis X was successfully reproduced by feeding
dogs a brand of dog food previously incriminated in cases of the
same disease (Seibold and Bailey, 1952; Newberne et al, 1955).
Later, researchers discovered that the identical disease syn-
drome could be elicited in dogs fed purified aflatoxin B1
(Newberne et al, 1966). Cases of canine aflatoxicosis resulting
from contaminated food have been reported in South America
and Africa (Coppock and Mostrom, 1986; Hagiwara et al,
1990). Consumption of an aflatoxin-contaminated commercial
pet food was reported to result in the deaths of more than 100
dogs in the United States in 2006 (Stenske et al, 2006).
The principal target organ in all species is the liver. Clinical
signs, such as anorexia, severe GI disturbances, jaundice and
hemorrhage, with a corresponding increase in hepatic enzyme
activities and a decrease in serum protein values, are typical
(Newberne and Butler, 1969; Edds, 1973; Neal, 1973; Stenske
et al, 2006). The most frequently observed hepatic lesions are
centrilobular necrosis, fibrosis and bile duct proliferation
(Puschner, 2002). Intravascular coagulation can also be a com-
plication of chronic aflatoxicosis (Green, 1977). Marked cyto-
plasmic vacuolar degeneration consistent with accumulation of
hepatocellular lipids was noted in dogs with confirmed aflatox-
icosis. Progression of clinical signs corresponded with increases
in alanine aminotransaminase (ALT) and aspartate amino-
transaminase activities, hyperbilirubinemia, hypoalbuminemia,
hypocholesterolemia and coagulopathy (Stenske et al, 2006).
Hematemesis or melena was associated with a grave prognosis.
In another report, dogs that died were significantly younger,
had lower total protein and higher total bilirubin, ALT and
alkaline phosphatase values when compared to the same
parameters in survivors. The authors concluded that hypocho-
lesterolemia and reduced protein C values were biomarkers for
aflatoxicosis (Dereszynski et al, 2006).
Today, manufacturers and governmental regulatory agencies
strive to minimize exposure to aflatoxins by using low-level
detection methods. Aflatoxins are heat stable and not destroyed
by boiling, autoclaving or food manufacturing methods. The
FDA has established an action level of 20 ppb for total aflatox-
ins in pet food (Office of Enforcement, 1994). Therefore, pre-
vention strategies involve identification of raw materials with
unacceptable levels (>20 ppb), maintenance of proper storage
conditions and assay of final feeds.
VOMITOXIN
Vomitoxin, chemically known as deoxynivalenol, is a myco-
toxin produced by members of the genus Fusarium (Council for
Agricultural Science and Technology, 1989). Vomitoxin can be
found in any grain but most commonly affects wheat and bar-
ley. Like most other mycotoxins, it is heat stable and survives
extrusion and drying (Hughes et al, 1999).
Dogs and swine, the species most susceptible to the effects of
vomitoxin, are affected at relatively low concentrations. The
mechanism of action is inhibition of protein synthesis (Bohm
and Razzazi-Fazeli, 2005). Experimentally, acute toxicity
affects rapidly dividing cells in lymph nodes, spleen, thymus
and intestinal mucosa, and may be immunosuppressive (Bondy
and Pestka, 2000). Clinical signs include feed refusal, vomiting
and diarrhea. Vomiting and feed refusal are apparently due to
neurochemical changes in the brain, rather than taste (Riley
and Pestka, 2005). In a study using 0 to 10 mg
deoxynivalenol/kg pet food, individual dogs and cats were
233
Food Safety
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 230 ---
highly variable in their response to vomitoxin. Some animals
vomited immediately after eating, whereas others exhibited
food refusal or decreased food intake without vomiting.
Compared to dogs, cats tolerate higher levels of deoxynivalenol.
Cats consumed small, frequent meals, whereas dogs ate one
large meal when the food was presented. Feeding behavior of
cats may have influenced their ability to tolerate higher levels of
deoxynivalenol (Hughes et al, 1999).
In 1993, the FDA advisory level for deoxynivalenol in grains
and grain by-products used in pet foods was 5 ppm with the
added recommendation that these ingredients not exceed 40%
of the food (i.e., 2 ppm deoxynivalenol in the complete pet
food) (Chesemore, 1993). However, feed refusal in dogs has
been reported in levels approaching 2 ppm (Maune, 1995).
Therefore, a more practical maximum level is 1 ppm. In 1995,
vomitoxin levels in winter wheat were reportedly as high as 32
ppm. One major pet food company recalled 16,000 tons of
products due to deoxynivalenol contamination at a cost of
about $20 million (Industry News, 1995).
FUMONISINS
The fumonisins are a group of recently described mycotoxins
produced by Fusarium moniliforme, a common field fungus
found in grains, beans and fruit (Gelderblom et al, 1988;
Haschek and Haliburton, 1986). Although F. moniliforme
reportedly infects 80 to 100% of all corn harvested in the
United States, little information is available about the toxicity
of fumonisins in dogs and cats. However, these potent myco-
toxins cause leukoencephalomalacia in horses and liver disease
in a number of other species. Fumonisin-contaminated pet
foods have not been a problem to date.
OTHER MYCOTOXINS
The mycotoxins produced by Penicillium can be roughly cat-
egorized into those that cause kidney or liver lesions, such as
ochratoxin A, and those that are neurotoxins, called tremor-
gens. The tremorgens are mold metabolites that act as neuro-
toxins. Mortality resulting from tremorgens is difficult to diag-
nose postmortem because they cause no visible lesions (Pitt,
2001).The toxic effects of penitrem A have been reported (Arp
and Richard, 1979; Hayes et al, 1976). Penetrim A toxicity led
to life-threatening tremors in dogs that ingested moldy cream
cheese or unidentified materials in a compost pile (Boysen et al,
2002; Young et al, 2003). Affected animals recover with no
residual effects if the tremors are addressed with anesthesia and
dehydration is prevented (Richard, 2000).
Ochratoxin A primarily affects the kidney, but can affect the
liver if levels are high. Toxicity in dogs has been reported
(Szczech et al,1973).The toxin is not rapidly removed from the
body and may accumulate. High levels of ochratoxin have been
detected in house dust (Richard, 2000).
Canine and feline toxicity data for many of the other food-
borne mycotoxins are scant in the scientific literature.The toxic
effects of rubratoxin B and cyclopiazonic acid have been
described and documented (Hayes and Williams, 1977;
Nuehring et al, 1985).
Biogenic Amines
“Cadaveric alkaloids” isolated from putrefied bodies have been
known to forensic toxicologists for more than 100 years (Blanke
and Poklis, 1993). Modern chemistry has now established that
these decomposition products are not alkaloids but instead are
“biogenic amines.” They are produced when bacteria decar-
boxylate amino acids in animal tissue. Examples of biogenic
amines include histamine, putrescine and cadaverine.
Detection of histamine in the tissues of fish indicates decom-
position or spoilage. Normal commercially canned fish contain
histamine levels less than 5 to 6 ppm (Dykstra, 1995). As the
level of histamine approaches 20 ppm, spoilage becomes
organoleptically and physically evident.
Excessive levels of histamine (around 500 ppm) in the flesh
of spoiled fish in combination with a toxin called saurine are
thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of a human food-
borne illness called “scombroid fish poisoning” (Dykstra, 1995;
Russell and Dart, 1993; Morrow et al, 1991). This common
seafood-related illness is named for its association with con-
sumption of scombroid fishes, such as tuna, wahoo, mackerel
and sardines, although other fishes and cheese have been impli-
cated (Morrow et al, 1991; Taylor, 1986). The disease produces
clinical signs of an allergic nature, i.e., flushing, sweating, nau-
sea, diarrhea, rash, dizziness, facial swelling, respiratory distress
and occasionally vasodilatory shock, but the disease is rarely
fatal (Morrow et al, 1991; Taylor, 1986). The FDA has recog-
nized histamine’s role in scombroid poisoning by setting a max-
imum action level of 500 ppm histamine in canned fish
(Dykstra, 1995).
Histamine and other biogenic amines such as putrescine and
cadaverine have also been detected in pet foods.Their presence
has been attributed to the use of poultry, fish and meat by-
products as raw ingredients. The levels of histamine in pet
foods reported in each of two different studies ranged from 3.8
to 88.8 ppm and 16 to 65.5 ppm, respectively (Guilford et al,
1994; Guraya and Koehler, 1991). Dogs and cats are tolerant to
much higher levels of histamine (2,500 ppm), but research is
needed to determine whether certain hypersensitive animals
may be at risk (Blonz and Olcott, 1978).
Metals
Metals are probably the oldest toxic agents known to man
(Goyer, 1993).They are unique in that they are never destroyed
nor created, just redistributed in the environment. Food is the
most common source of metal toxicity in people and other ani-
mals. Pets frequently serve as sentinels for human exposure.
Pet foods can become contaminated in several ways. First,
metals tend to accumulate in plant and animal matter, creating
the possibility of toxic levels in food ingredients. Foods can also
become contaminated during commercial manufacturing and
home preparation by the inadvertent addition of metal shav-
ings, grease, oils and other chemicals. Acidic foods can leach
paint, soldered joints or plating agents from food containers.
Young animals may ingest lead by chewing on painted wood,
linoleum, metal toys, golf balls, roofing materials, drapery
weights and ornaments (Osweiler et al, 1985).
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
234
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 231 ---
Most foodborne metal toxicities in dogs and cats involve
lead, zinc, cadmium and arsenic.These agents cause a variety of
clinical syndromes depending on age, dose ingested and length
of exposure. The specifics of metal toxicities are well described
in several veterinary toxicology textbooks and are beyond the
scope of this chapter.
The tendency of metals to accumulate in plants and animals
has ramifications for the manufacture of commercial pet
foods. Several studies have been conducted to quantify such
accumulations. In one study, researchers analyzed 28 brands
of commercial dog food and seven brands of cat food and
found that average levels of lead, arsenic and cadmium were
1.26, 0.37 and 0.22 ppm, respectively (Edwards et al, 1979).
A later study of 35 dog foods and 13 cat foods found the aver-
age levels of lead, cadmium and zinc were 0.88, 0.80 and
122.0 ppm, respectively (Mumma et al, 1986). These studies
confirm that nontoxic levels of metals may be present in some
pet foods; however, their presence at these levels would not
support a diagnosis of metal toxicity. Instead, a definite diag-
nosis must be based upon finding toxic levels in the food that
correspond to elevated levels in the patient’s tissues, such as
blood, liver and kidney.
Other Sources
SUPPLEMENTS
Many people supplement their own food with vitamins,
herbal remedies and other items purchased at health food
stores. Well-meaning pet owners likewise think that what is
good for them is also good for their pets. Unfortunately, this
practice fails to consider species and dose differences. Cats, in
particular, may be adversely affected by medications considered
safe for people. Certainly, vitamin A and D toxicity is well doc-
umented. It is also known that many herbal remedies cause
adverse effects in people and animals (Poppenga, 1995;
Remillard and Wynn, 2005). Therefore, the safety of other
“natural” supplements such as aloe, ginseng root, eucalyptus,
ginger and oil of wintergreen has yet to be established for dogs
and cats. As the investigation of the clinical case proceeds, the
veterinarian should ask the owner how and why the animal’s
food is being supplemented with these substances.
ONIONS AND GARLIC
Owners may also supplement a pet’s food with onions or gar-
lic. Onions derive part of their flavor from n-propyl disulfide,
which is toxic to the erythrocytes of several species (Jain, 1993).
In 1990, a phenolic compound was extracted from onions that
increased methemoglobin concentrations and caused the for-
mation of Heinz bodies in canine erythrocytes (Miyata, 1990).
Onions may injure the lipid membranes of erythrocytes and
irreversibly denature hemoglobin (Jain, 1993). These changes
result in Heinz body formation, hemolytic anemia and hemo-
globinuria. The most common cause of Heinz body hemolysis
in dogs is related to ingestion of onions. Although the toxicity
has been known for more than 50 years, animal owners still
unknowingly feed onions to dogs as part of table food or inten-
tionally as a supplement. The hemolytic episode may be diffi-
cult to correlate with onion ingestion because it occurs several
days postingestion. Clinical signs related to moderate Heinz
body anemia have occurred in dogs consuming relatively small
amounts (5 to 10 g of onions/kg body weight) of raw, cooked
or dehydrated onions (Harvey and Rackear, 1985; Ogawa et al,
1986). In one study, consumption of approximately 30 g of raw
onions/kg body weight for three consecutive days produced
severe anemia, erythrocyte Heinz bodies and hemoglobinuria
in all dogs fed onions (Ogawa et al, 1986). One animal devel-
oped severe icterus and died on Day 5.
Cats are prone to developing erythrocyte Heinz bodies after
exposure to many chemicals in food (Jain, 1993; Hickman et al,
1990; Christopher et al, 1989). Likewise, Heinz body anemia
has occurred in cats after consumption of onions (Kobayashi,
1981). Baby food or other foods containing similar amounts of
onion powder should not be fed to cats because of Heinz body
formation and the potential for development of anemia, espe-
cially with high food intake.Cats with concurrent oxidative dis-
eases may develop additive hemoglobin damage when fed baby
food containing onion powder (Robertson et al, 1998).
Garlic (Allium sativum) is also a member of the onion fami-
ly. Long-term exposure to garlic and garlic extracts caused ane-
mia, contact dermatitis and asthmatic attacks in dogs
(Poppenga, 1995). Eccentrocytosis appears to be a major diag-
nostic feature of garlic-induced hemolysis in dogs. The con-
stituents of garlic have the potential to oxidize erythrocyte
membranes and hemoglobin, inducing hemolysis associated
with the appearance of eccentrocytes in dogs.Thus, foods con-
taining garlic should not be fed to dogs (Lee et al, 2000).
CHOCOLATE
Pets today are often fed “people” food. One delicacy that has
potential to cause toxicity is chocolate. Chocolate products con-
tain variable amounts of theobromine, a potent cardiovascular
and central nervous system stimulant (Clark et al, 1981).
Although pet owners might believe that chocolate is innocu-
ous, one poison control center documented six cases of choco-
late poisoning in dogs during a single year (Hornfeldt, 1987).
Signs such as vomiting, diarrhea, panting, nervousness, excite-
ment, tremors, tachycardia, cardiac dysrhythmias, coma, con-
vulsions and sudden death may appear in four to 15 hours after
ingestion (Hornfeldt, 1987; Gauberg and Blumenthal, 1983;
Hooser, 1984; Sutton, 1981). Renal damage may occur in
severe cases.
The toxic dose of theobromine has been reported to be greater
than 200 mg/kg body weight (Hornfeldt, 1987). However, a
springer spaniel died after ingestion of two lb of milk chocolate,
corresponding to a dose of only 92 mg of theobromine/kg body
weight (Gauberg and Blumenthal, 1983). Based on this case,
consumption of one typical 1.55-oz. milk chocolate bar (93 mg
theobromine)/kg body weight could produce clinical signs and
possibly death (Hooser, 1984). Unsweetened baking chocolate
also contains high levels of theobromine (450 mg/oz.) and has
been implicated in cases of toxicity (Hooser, 1984). Finally, dogs
have also been poisoned by ingesting cocoa powder (1 to 3%
theobromine) (Sutton, 1981).
235
Food Safety
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 232 ---
Theobromine is eliminated very slowly in dogs. This
metabolic peculiarity prolongs the clinical syndrome and
increases the risk of toxicity from repeated ingestion of
small doses of theobromine. Because there is no available
antidote for theobromine toxicity, symptomatic treatments
such as administration of emetics, activated charcoal, tran-
quilizers, sedatives and lidocaine should be used in clinical
cases of chocolate toxicity.
GRAPES AND RAISINS
Acute renal failure has been associated with ingestion of vari-
able amounts of grapes or raisins by dogs; as little as 0.41 oz./kg
in one case (Gwaltney-Brant et al, 2001). Vomiting and
azotemia are the most consistent findings, occurring in 100% of
the cases in a retrospective review (Eubig et al, 2005). Varying
degrees of renal tubular degeneration and proximal necrosis
also occur (Morrow et al, 2005). A number of etiologies have
been proposed, including heavy metals, mycotoxins and pesti-
cide residues, but given the lack of a dose-response relationship,
no clear toxic principle has been identified. Suggested therapy
includes gastric decontamination protocols to induce emesis
followed by activated charcoal administration and fluid diuresis
(Mazzaferro et al, 2004).
FEEDING PLAN
If a diagnosis of foodborne illness seems feasible, then the pet
owner should be questioned extensively about the animal’s
food. First, the veterinarian should identify all possible food
sources (including commercial foods, home-prepared foods and
table scraps) and determine the feeding amounts and the avail-
ability of unintentional food sources. Common questions con-
cerning commercial foods should include: 1) brand name, 2)
manufacturer, 3) lot or date code, 4) form of food (i.e., dry,
semi-moist, moist), 5) feeding method (i.e., meal fed, free
choice), 6) the length of time the pet has been consuming the
brand of food, 7) the length of time the pet has been fed from
the present container of food (i.e., bag or can), 8) whether water
is mixed with the food, 9) how long the food is left in the food
bowl, 10) the ambient temperature at feeding, 11) the method
of storing the food and 12) whether other pets in the household
consume the same food.
Questions about home-prepared foods should include: 1) the
source of ingredients, 2) storage methods for the ingredients
and the food, 3) method of preparation, 4) preparation temper-
atures, 5) method of measuring temperatures and 6) feeding
method. Any recent change in either the food ingredients or
preparation methods should be investigated further.
The amount of food consumed should be compared with the
calculated amount typically consumed by an animal of similar
size. If the amount consumed is markedly less than the calcu-
lated amount, it could mean that the animal does not like the
food and may be foraging other food sources or garbage.
Decreased intake may also indicate food refusal typical of vom-
itoxin contamination.
Sampling Procedures
Most veterinary diagnostic laboratories can perform the tests
necessary to facilitate a diagnosis of foodborne illness. Many
investigative tests and techniques are available to the diagnostic
laboratory to help assess the case. In fact, the number is so over-
whelming that only a few can be used on a particular sample. It
is essential that the veterinarian discuss the likely diagnoses
with laboratory personnel before test initiation to ensure the
tests most critical to a correct diagnosis are performed.
Veterinarians also need to determine the laboratory’s preferred
specimens and methods of specimen preservation.
Sample/specimen collection should follow the rules of phys-
ical evidence even if the possibility of litigation seems remote or
nonexistent to ensure results are admissible in court if circum-
stances change. The admissibility of this information in a trial
depends on whether: 1) all specimens and/or samples were
properly identified, 2) the “chain of custody” (Table 11-3) is
documented by a specific and detailed description of all events
and changes of possession starting at the time of collection,
through transportation and transferal to final sample analysis at
the laboratory and 3) the evidence is relevant to the case (Grau,
1993). Therefore, it is also important to inform laboratory per-
sonnel if there is any possibility of litigation.
The best sources of samples for assessment of the food for
possible etiologic agents are: 1) the actual food source, 2) food
ingredients (homemade foods), 3) stomach contents, 4) intes-
tinal contents and 5) feces. The following procedures and
methods relate primarily to assessment of the food but also
could be used to evaluate any previously described specimens
(e.g., urine, blood, tissues, etc.).
The pet owner should bring the entire container of food or
containers of food ingredients to the veterinarian to ensure that
sample collection follows aseptic technique and the rules of evi-
dence collection (Grau, 1993; Edwards, 1989). Sample collec-
tion techniques are described in detail in Table 11-4. Label all
sample containers as space allows with a sample number and a
description of the contents, submitter’s name, pet owner’s
name, date, product label information and lot number.
Supporting information and descriptions that cannot be writ-
ten on the sample label because of space constraints should be
numbered identically to the sample and submitted with the
sample (Osweiler et al, 1985; Edwards, 1989; Galey, 1992).
Detection Methods 
Bacterial Isolation and Identification 
Pet food ingredients, like most other foods, contain a diverse
microbial flora. Therefore, no single growth medium will satis-
fy the requirements of all organisms that may be present in a
sample. The veterinarian should discuss likely pathogens with
laboratory personnel so that the best methods, enrichment
techniques and selective media can be used (Galey, 1992;
Quinn et al, 1994).
Most laboratories will use a variety of direct examination and
culture techniques to attempt a successful identification (Quinn
et al, 1994). First, smears of the specimens collected by either
the veterinarian or laboratory personnel will be stained and
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
236
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 233 ---
examined. Then growth and colony characteristics of bacterial
isolates will be determined using a variety of media. The pres-
ence or absence of certain bacterial biochemical characteristics
and atmospheric growth conditions will also be explored.
Finally, a variety of other tests and techniques will be used to
facilitate the identification process (e.g., API 20E strips and
Staph-Trac).d
Analytical Chemistry
Metal assays are usually performed using some type of atom-
ic spectroscopy, e.g., atomic absorption spectroscopy and
inductively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy (Galey,
1992). Organic compounds such as pesticides and solvents are
usually detected by chromatography, e.g., gas chromatogra-
phy, high-pressure liquid chromatography, thin-layer chro-
matography. After a compound has been identified prelimi-
narily by chromatography, results are often confirmed using
mass spectrometry.
Mycotoxins can be detected by chromatography methods,
radioimmunoassay (RIA) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) (Quinn et al, 1994). Staphylococcal enterotoxins
can be identified using ELISA, RIA, serologic, precipitin and
gel diffusion techniques (Freer and Arbuthnott, 1986). ELISA
can also be used to detect the exotoxins and endotoxins of other
bacterial species. C. botulinum exotoxins can be identified by
serum neutralization using commercially available antisera fol-
lowed by assay in laboratory animals (Quinn et al, 1994).
Significant Pathogen Levels in Food
Commercial foods are not sterile and may contain species of
organisms associated with foodborne illnesses in people.
However, the infective dose of each foodborne pathogen can
vary greatly depending on the food substrate, the immunologic
status of the host and the resistance of the normal intestinal
flora (Council for Agricultural Science and Technology, 1994).
The same factors apply to foodborne illness in animals with
the exception that the animal species can also influence the
infective or toxic dose. Therefore, the relationship between
microbial populations and the quality of foods can only be esti-
mated and must be viewed with caution, especially when one
considers that most sampling and microbial counting proce-
dures possess inherent inaccuracies. Also, many organisms have
fastidious growth and unique colonization requirements (i.e.,
medium, temperature and atmosphere). Although laboratory
personnel will try various permutations, it is not always possi-
ble to find the correct combination given the limitations of
sample size. In addition, the specimen may contain a microor-
ganism that produces antimicrobial peptides that inhibit the
growth of other species. Finally, the various counting proce-
dures will also kill some of the bacteria present in the sample.
The scientific literature contains few data establishing the
relative risk of foodborne illness and the microbial content of
pet foods. Measuring the microbial content of pet foods is dif-
ficult but interpreting the results with respect to wholesome-
ness or food safety is even more difficult because risk quantifi-
cation also depends on other factors, such as storage conditions.
However, measurement of microbial populations may yield
valuable information when used to compare one sample of a pet
food with another sample of the same product. For example, it
would be valuable to know whether bacterial numbers had
increased dramatically while the food was in the pet’s bowl.
This information helps establish the level of hygiene and time-
liness of the pet’s feeding schedule. In summary, the presence of
an organism in a food does not alone establish the diagnosis but
must be considered as one piece of the diagnostic “puzzle.”
Control and Prevention
Methods for control and prevention of foodborne illness in pets
apply to commercial (after purchase) and home-prepared
foods. Following the practices described in Table 11-5 can best
prevent foodborne illnesses in pet foods.
Food storage is an important preventive measure. Proper
storage depends on control of: 1) temperature, 2) moisture and
3) availability of oxygen. First, high temperatures markedly
decrease the shelf life of both canned and dry foods, especially
when temperatures exceed 20°C (68°F) (Emsminger et al,
1995; Containers, 1968). Therefore, all commercial pet foods
should be stored in the 4.4 to 15.6°C (40 to 60°F) temperature
range. Fresh, home-prepared foods should be refrigerated at
–1.6 to 15.5°C (29 to 60°F) before feeding. (Most household
refrigerators hold foods at 4.4 to 7.2°C [40 to 45°F].) The
length of time that a food can be kept refrigerated depends on
its type and age. Fresh meats, fish and poultry can be kept for
two to 10 days whereas fruits and vegetables will remain whole-
some for weeks when refrigerated.
Moist products are sealed and therefore not affected by mois-
ture or air; control of these factors applies only to storage of
237
Food Safety
Table 11-3. Procedures for the collection, transfer and 
preservation of physical evidence.*
• Collect, package and identify all samples according to the
procedures listed in Table 11-4.
• Maintain a record of every person who had custody of any
sample(s) or other evidence from the time that it was collect-
ed until presented in court (“chain of custody”) by keeping a
written log or diary of all relevant facts and sample transfers.
• Write notes documenting the time, place, description and
circumstances of all samples entered in the log. Describe in
detail how the samples were identified (numbered),
processed, packaged, stored and shipped.
• If possible, photograph any apparent pathologic lesions,
mold growth, foreign matter in the food, etc. Number the
photographs consecutively and describe each photograph in
the written notes.
• Write notes about all telephone conversations related to the
case in the log, including the date, time and content of the
conversation.
• Date all new entries in the log and have the person writing in
the log initial the entry.
• Retain and store all relevant product labels in a safe place.
• Use a shipping method that expedites delivery of the sam-
ples to the laboratory. Keep copies of all shipping records.
Hand carry the samples to the laboratory if possible. Obtain
written proof of delivery (e.g., receipt). 
*Adapted from Grau JJ. Criminal and Civil Investigation
Handbook, 2nd ed., New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, Inc, 1993.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 234 ---
bulk dry commercial foods. Spoilage bacteria require at least
30% moisture for growth whereas molds require 5 to 15%. Dry
pet foods have moisture content in the range of 6 to 9%.
Therefore, dry commercial pet foods will have a satisfactory
shelf life if stored in a cool dry place with the top of the bag or
container closed. These precautions limit the availability of
moisture and air needed for oxidative chemical degradation and
microbial growth. Placing the food still in its sack in a canister
or other closed container will extend the shelf life by further
reducing the availability of moisture and oxygen. This method
of storage has the added advantage of preventing rodent and
insect damage and maintaining palatability. In addition, storing
the product in the original bag will preserve the date code
information stamped on the bag and enhance investigation of a
problem if one occurs.
REASSESSMENT
The type and duration of therapy will be dictated by the diag-
nosis and the physical condition of the patient. Therapy typi-
cally will consist of supportive, symptomatic treatment because
most foodborne illnesses are self-limiting. With illnesses such
as metal poisoning or mycotoxicoses that produce characteris-
tic blood or biochemical changes, those specific parameters
should be monitored routinely for evidence of recovery. In
those cases in which the patient does not recover, veterinarians
should first reassess the patient to ascertain whether exposure
to the foodborne agent has been discontinued. If so, then an
inaccurate diagnosis or other pathologic factors may have
complicated the case. Continued monitoring of laboratory
parameters is warranted. Animals that recover only to suffer
another bout of foodborne illness at a later date are obviously
being exposed to unsafe foods. Therefore, the veterinarian
should counsel the pet owner to prevent further recurrences
(Table 11-5).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors and editors acknowledge the contribution of Dr.
James Cullor in the previous edition of Small Animal Clinical
Nutrition.
ENDNOTES
a. Crane S. Feeding raw diet mythology. Personal communica-
tion. 2006.
b. Miller EP. Unpublished data. September 1996.
c. Cullor JS. Unpublished data. May 1995.
d. Analytab Products, Inc, Plainview, NY, USA.
REFERENCES
The references for Chapter 11 can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
238
Table 11-4. Sampling procedures for foodborne illnesses.
• Collect samples for toxicologic and microbiologic studies as
separate samples and label them accordingly.
• Collect several samples from the same source, e.g., different
areas of the food bag, stool specimen.
• Treat samples as though they were being prepared for a legal
case by following the rules of evidence.
• Collect duplicate samples or split samples so that the veteri-
narian can retain one sample and the other can be submitted
to the laboratory.
• Collect samples for microbiologic testing aseptically using
sterile gloves, instruments and containers.
• Use watertight sample containers, preferably with screw-type
lids.
• Label all sample containers with an accurate and complete
description of the contents, e.g., submitter’s name, client’s
name, date and time collected, product name, etc. Submit
other sample information and any supporting descriptions
with the samples.
Table 11-5. Prevention of foodborne illness in animals.
Commercial pet foods (moist or dry kibble)
Discard foods from bulging or leaking cans and damaged bags.
Discard all foods with an abnormal color, foreign materials,
odor or moldy appearance.
Discard dry foods 30 minutes after adding water.
Avoid frozen raw diets.
Homemade diets
Use raw ingredients appropriate for human consumption.
Cook ground meat thoroughly to the center.
Sear the surface of whole meat cuts.
Cook all eggs: whole, yolks, whites and shells if used as calci-
um supplement.
Wash all raw fruits and vegetables.
Control food contamination
Use stainless steel utensils, feeding bowls, etc. whenever pos-
sible.
Keep food preparation areas, cooking utensils and food bowls
spotlessly clean. Wash and disinfect bowls and utensils daily.
Store dry, commercial foods in a cool, dry environment, free
from insects and rodents.
Empty the feeding bowl of moist or moistened foods not con-
sumed within two to four hours if the ambient temperature is
above 10°C (50°F).
Clean, wash and disinfect food utensils and food bowls after
each feeding.
If feeding free choice, check food daily for mold and spoilage.
Control microorganisms in food using physical means
Cook all home-prepared foods at 82°C (180°F) for at least 10
minutes.
Verify cooking temperatures with a cooking thermometer and
internal meat temperatures with a meat thermometer.
Validate thermometer accuracy periodically with boiling water.
Cover all perishable foods and opened cans of pet food and
store in the refrigerator at 4°C (40°F) when not being prepared,
cooked or consumed.
Control the pet’s access to unintentional foods
Minimize roaming on trash pick up days.
Monitor closely when off leash.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 235 ---
239
Food Safety
CASE 11-1
Ulcerative Dermatitis in a Greyhound
Laine Cowan, DVM, Dipl. ACVIM (Internal Medicine)
College of Veterinary Medicine
Kansas State University
Manhattan, Kansas, USA
Patient Assessment
A two-year-old female greyhound that had been in training at a
racetrack in Arkansas was examined for depression, swelling of
the distal limbs and feet and skin ulceration. Other dogs from the
same racing kennel had been affected with similar problems in
the past.
Results of physical examination included depression,vomiting,
subcutaneous edema involving both rear limbs, primarily distal to
the stifle, and skin lesions. The skin lesions were focal, reddened
areas that became dark red or black on the surface after a few
hours. Several small ulcers were present on the distal extremities
(Figure 1) and a large, well-demarcated ulcer was present on the
left medial thigh (Figure 2). A large area of bruising and ecchy-
moses was evident on the ventral abdomen.
Clinical pathologic abnormalities included leukocytosis with
neutrophilia, thrombocytopenia (29,000 platelets/µl; reference
range = 200,000 to 500,000/µl), and severe azotemia (urea nitro-
gen = 240 mg/dl [10 to 20 mg/dl]; serum creatinine = 5.6 mg/dl
[0.6 to 1.2 mg/dl]).
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
All dogs in the kennel were fed a mixture of raw ground beef, dry
commercial dog food and a powdered vitamin-mineral supple-
ment.The beef was obtained from a commercial vendor in frozen
packages and thawed before it was mixed with the dry food and
supplement. The dogs were fed a portion of this mixture once
daily.
Questions
1. What foodborne illnesses might be responsible for the clinical
signs in this patient?
2. What specific diagnostic tests should be performed to investi-
gate causes of foodborne illness in this patient?
3. What measures should be instituted to prevent outbreaks of
foodborne illness in this kennel?
Answers and Discussion
1. Outbreaks of Salmonella
enteritis (“kennel sickness,”
“blowout”) and systemic salmonellosis are common among
greyhounds in kennels. The clinical signs are usually mild to
severe diarrhea that typically resolves in a few days. Occasional
systemic infections occur with high morbidity rates, especially
in puppies and young dogs. Racing greyhounds contract salmonellosis primarily by eating contaminated raw meat. Other food-
borne bacterial diseases that result in gastrointestinal or systemic signs include campylobacteriosis, shigellosis and listeriosis.
A syndrome of cutaneous multifocal ulceration, often accompanied by limb edema or acute renal failure, has been recog-
nized in young, adult greyhound dogs.The syndrome has been referred to as “Alabama rot” and described as idiopathic cutaneous
Figure 1. Right distal limb of a two-year-old female greyhound.
Note the numerous small, well-demarcated ulcers.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 236 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
240
and renal glomerular vasculopathy. Reports of this syndrome
have been limited to the greyhound breed. Clinical signs include
acute erythema and edema progressing rapidly to well-demarcat-
ed cutaneous ulcers of the distal extremities, especially the hind
limbs. Some dogs develop acute renal failure, which is usually
fatal. Significant microscopic lesions are limited to the skin and
kidney. Cutaneous lesions are characterized by vascular necrosis
of arterioles, with ischemic necrosis and ulceration of the epider-
mis. Renal lesions are predominantly glomerular, including
thrombi in glomerular capillaries and glomerular endothelial
necrosis.
This syndrome in greyhound dogs resembles hemolytic uremic
syndrome in people and edema disease in swine, which are
thought to involve a Shiga-like toxin binding to and damaging
vascular endothelium. Platelet aggregation contributes to throm-
bosis. Shiga-like toxins can be produced by a variety of bacteria,
but Escherichia coli strain O157:H7 is incriminated most often.
Because most racing greyhounds are fed raw meat, there is the
potential for them to be exposed to Shiga-like toxin-producing
E. coli
2. Bacterial organisms can be recovered by culturing the raw meat and commercial dry food and the patient’s feces and blood.
Large numbers of toxin-producing E. coli have been found in meat samples fed to greyhounds and in fecal samples from clin-
ical cases.
3. The occurrence of disease related to contaminated meat is closely related to how the meat is handled on the farm or track before
feeding. Preventive measures should include proper cooking and storage of meat whenever possible. Of primary importance is
the temperature of the meat once it has thawed. When large blocks of frozen meat are thawed at room temperature, the out-
ermost surface of the meat can reach unacceptably high temperatures before the center has thawed. Thawing meat slowly at
refrigerator temperatures or in a camp cooler will markedly reduce surface bacterial growth.
Many foodborne pathogens persist in the environment for extended periods. In some cases, the occurrence of food poison-
ing is associated with inadequate hygiene and failure to isolate dogs with diarrhea that are shedding large numbers of organ-
isms. All facilities and equipment should be frequently cleaned with soap and then disinfected with bleach or phenolic com-
pounds.
Progress Notes
The dog was treated with intravenous fluids, parenteral antibiotics and whirlpool baths in dilute povidone-iodine solution.
Cimetidine and antiemetics were given to help control vomiting. Despite these efforts, the dog died 48 hours later of acute renal
failure.
Necropsy findings included slightly pale, swollen kidneys with prominent, congested glomeruli and capsular petechiae. Mural
edema of the stomach and black tarry colonic contents were also evident. Microscopic renal lesions included glomerular thrombot-
ic microangiopathy; hyalin thrombi were present in glomerular capillaries and afferent arterioles. Glomerular capillary walls were
thickened.
Bibliography
Chengappa MM, Staats J, Oberst RD, et al. Prevalence of Salmonella in raw meat used in diets of racing greyhounds. Journal of
Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation 1993; 5: 372-377.
Cowan LA, Hertzke DM, Fenwick BW, et al. Clinical and clinicopathologic abnormalities in greyhounds with cutaneous and renal
glomerular vasculopathy; 18 cases (1992-1994). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 1997; 210: 789-793.
Fenwick BW, Hertzke D, Cowan LA. Alabama rot: Almost the complete story. In: Proceedings. Eleventh Annual International
Canine Sports Medicine Symposium. Orlando, FL, 1995: 15-21.
Hertzke DM, Cowan LA, Schoning P, et al. Glomerular ultrastructural lesions of idiopathic cutaneous and renal glomerulopathy
of greyhounds. Veterinary Pathology 1995; 32: 451-459.
Figure 2. View of the ventral abdomen and left medial thigh of the
same dog. Note the extensive contusions on the ventral abdomen
and large, well-demarcated ulcer involving a large portion of the
medial thigh
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 237 ---
CASE 11-2
Food Poisoning in Two Dogs
Lawrence H. Arp, DVM, PhD, Dipl. ACVP
Nutley, New Jersey, USA
Patient Assessment
A three-month-old male Australian shepherd dog was examined for severe muscle tremors, polypnea, hyperkinesias and ataxia, with
intermittent opisthotonos and generalized seizures. The dog was anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital to control motor activity.
Intravenous fluids were administered. After recovery from anesthesia, the dog was still atactic but less hyperkinetic.
On the same day, a one-year-old male Irish setter from the same neighborhood was admitted for treatment of muscle tremors
and clonic seizures. The dog vomited 30 minutes before clinical signs were observed. It was treated in a similar manner to the first
dog. Both dogs were clinically normal 12 hours later except for slight incoordination.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
The owner of the first dog reported finding a partly eaten package of moldy cream cheese in his yard. The cream cheese had been
purchased about one month earlier, had been partially used and then refrigerated until it was found covered with mold. The owner
had thrown it out the previous day. Both dogs had access to the cream cheese but were not seen eating it. The cream cheese was
covered with a dark blue-green fungal mat. Both dogs were of normal weight for their age and had normal body condition scores
(3/5). No other nutritional history was available.
Questions
1. What potential foodborne diseases might cause the clinical signs in these dogs?
2. What diagnostic tests could be performed to confirm a foodborne illness?
Answers and Discussion
1. Members of the genera Penicillium and Aspergillus produce penitrem A and aflatoxin, respectively, two potent mycotoxins.These
fungi are isolated most frequently from refrigerators and moldy foodstuffs in the home. These fungal genera also may be isolat-
ed from stored feeds and cereal grains that may eventually enter the pet food chain.
Penitrem A causes acute muscle tremors, seizures and prostration in several animal species. The severity of clinical and patho-
logic features is dose dependent. Mildly affected dogs have transitory muscle tremors and ataxia lasting two to four hours, where-
as larger doses may cause seizures and death. Normal neurologic function progressively returns after one or two days in animals
that recover. Visceral petechiae, hepatic necrosis and hyperthermia may occur in dogs with mycotoxicosis.
Ingestion or topical exposure to a variety of other compounds may also cause neurologic signs. Examples include various insec-
ticides (pyrethrins, pyrethroids, organophosphates, carbamates), methylxanthines (chocolate), metaldehyde, various ornamental
plants (Chinaberry, English ivy, jimson weed, tulip, yellow iris), illicit drugs (marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines), strychnine and
lead.
2. The moldy cream cheese could be sent to a laboratory for identification of fungal elements and further toxicologic testing.
Establishing a diagnosis of plant or illicit drug poisoning is difficult without specific evidence of ingestion. Whole blood
cholinesterase activity will be depressed in organophosphate and carbamate toxicosis.
Progress Notes
Because both dogs recovered rapidly there was no need to change the foods or the feeding methods. The owners were instructed
to limit access to spoiled food by proper disposal.
Examination of the moldy cream cheese by light microscopy revealed fungal elements typical of the genus Penicillium.The organ-
ism was later identified as P. crustaceum, a common contaminant of refrigerated foodstuffs. P. crustaceum produces large quantities of
penitrem A at 4°C.
Three mice were given a moldy cheese emulsion by mouth and developed hyperkinesia, irritability, generalized muscle tremors
and tonic-clonic seizures within two hours. Penitrem A was identified by thin-layer chromatography from a sample of the moldy
cream cheese; therefore, this mycotoxin was considered the cause of the clinical signs in both dogs.
Bibliography
Arp LH, Richard JL. Intoxication of dogs with the mycotoxin penitrem A. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
1979; 175: 565-566.
241
Food Safety
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 238 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
242
CASE 11-3
Vomiting and Diarrhea in a Puppy
James S. Cullor, DVM, PhD
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California, Davis
Davis, California, USA
Patient Assessment
A nine-week-old male German shepherd puppy was examined for evaluation of vomiting and diarrhea. There had been no prob-
lems until six days earlier when the puppy’s feces became liquid and bowel movements more frequent. The puppy vomited twice
several hours after the diarrhea was first noticed.The vomitus contained undigested food, but no evidence of foreign material, blood
or parasites. The dog was confined to the house or a fenced outdoor enclosure. The puppy was vaccinated a week before the clini-
cal problems began. When examined the puppy was mildly lethargic, about 5% dehydrated, but otherwise healthy.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
The dog was fed a commercial dry grocery brand food formulated for puppies. Fresh water and the dry food were offered free
choice. The food had been purchased from a large retail outlet one week before the onset of clinical signs. The puppy was eating
the dry food with no obvious problems. Three days before the onset of clinical signs, the owner began mixing the dry food with
water. The moistened food remained at room temperature or outside where temperatures reached 32.2°C (90°F) for several days.
The puppy became ill several hours after eating most of the moistened food.
Questions
1. What potential foodborne illnesses could be causing the clinical signs in this dog?
2. What techniques could be used to diagnose whether foodborne illness is causing the vomiting and diarrhea in this patient?
Answers and Discussion
1. A variety of foodborne illnesses can cause vomiting and diarrhea. These include contamination of food with bacterial organisms
or their toxins (Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella  spp., Neorickettsia spp., Escherichia coli, Bacillus cereus, Yersinia spp., Campylobacter
spp.), biogenic amines, aflatoxins, vomitoxin and heavy metals (lead, arsenic, zinc, cadmium).The fact that the dry food was mois-
tened with water and left at high ambient temperatures makes bacterial proliferation a likely cause of clinical signs.
2. Most veterinary diagnostic laboratories can perform the tests necessary to facilitate a diagnosis of foodborne illness. It is impor-
tant to determine the laboratory’s preferred specimens and method of specimen preservation. Bacterial isolation techniques can
often be performed on the food, vomitus and feces. Heavy metal, pesticide, biogenic amine and toxin assays can be performed on
food, serum, feces and other biological samples.
Progress Notes
There was no history that the puppy had access to illicit drugs, heavy metals, pesticides, toxic ornamental plants and garbage.
Results of a hemogram were normal, which made a diagnosis of viral enteritis unlikely. Three samples from the dry commercial
puppy food and three from the moistened food were cultured and grown aerobically. Feces were also cultured daily over the next
three days. Cultures revealed 1 x 102 colony forming units (cfu) of Bacillus cereus/g dry food and 1 x 107 cfu of B. cereus/g mois-
tened food. These results confirmed that bacteria had proliferated after the food was moistened and left at warm to hot ambi-
ent temperatures. B. cereus was also cultured once from diarrheic feces. No other bacterial pathogens were recovered from the
food or feces.
The puppy was treated with subcutaneous fluids and was fed a complete, balanced homemade food consisting of boiled lean
ground beef and rice, offered in small, frequent meals. The puppy’s feces gradually became firmer. After two days of therapy with
the homemade food, the original commercial dry puppy food was offered, without added moisture. The puppy was feeling well,
eating normal amounts of food and had normal stools by Day 7 after the onset of clinical signs. The pet owner was advised to not
add water to dry pet foods and leave them exposed to ambient temperatures for more than a few hours.
A tentative diagnosis of B. cereus enterotoxemia was made. B. cereus is known to cause vomiting and diarrhea in people; however,
it is not thought to pose a significant danger for foodborne illness in animals. B. cereus flourishes at room temperature, and certain
isolates possess the genetic capability to produce a potent enterotoxin. The organism is a ubiquitous, spore-forming aerobic sapro-
phyte found in soil, grains, cereal grain products and other foods. As an example, it is commonly found in uncooked rice. B. cereus
has been found as a common isolate in samples of dry pet food. It has also been isolated from food packaging paper and materials.
The standard heat treatments used in pet food manufacturing are not likely to kill the spores of this organism. However, the num-
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 239 ---
243
Food Safety
ber of organisms isolated from the pet food (<105 cells/g of food) is unlikely to cause foodborne disease in pets unless the food is
exposed to moisture and heat conditions conducive to bacterial proliferation.
Bibliography
Claus D, Berkeley RCW. Genus Bacillus. In: Sneath PHA, Mair NS, Sharpe ME, et al, eds. Bergey’s Manual of Systematic
Bacteriology. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1986; 1105-1139.
Drobniewski FA. Bacillus cereus and related species. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 1993; 6: 324-328.
Turnbull PCB, Kramer JM. Bacillus. In: Balows A, Hausler WJ, Herrmann KL, et al, eds. Manual of Clinical Microbiology, 5th
ed. Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology, 1991: 296-303.
Vaisanen OM, Mentu J, Salkinoja-Salnen MS. Bacteria in food packaging paper and board. Journal of Food Microbiology 1992;
71: 130-133.
CASE 11-4
Acute Renal Failure in a Yorkshire Terrier
Kenneth R. Harkin, DVM, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
College of Veterinary Medicine
Kansas State University
Manhattan, Kansas, USA
Patient Assessment
A 10-year-old, spayed female Yorkshire terrier was presented for evaluation of vomiting after consuming 1/2 to 3/4 cup of raisins
(organic flame variety), either in the overnight hours before or in the early morning hours of the day of presentation.The dog vom-
ited a large quantity of raisins in the late morning and also had a bout of diarrhea that contained raisins. The dog vomited foam
and bile four to five more times throughout the day. Although the dog wasn’t anorectic, it would vomit shortly after eating.
Physical examination revealed an alert patient with a normal body temperature, a heart rate of 140 beats/min. and a normal body
condition score (3/5; body weight was 7.2 kg). The patient was minimally dehydrated (5%) and had a full, but non-painful
abdomen.
Abnormalities noted on the complete blood count and serum biochemistry profile included hemoconcentration (hematocrit 58%
[reference range 37 to 55%]), azotemia (urea nitrogen 49 mg/dl [reference range 8 to 30 mg/dl], creatinine 4.0 mg/dl [reference
range 0.5 to 1.4 mg/dl], hyperphosphatemia (8.6 mg/dl [reference range 2.3 to 6.5 mg/dl]), hyperkalemia (6.6 mmol/l [reference
range 3.8 to 5.5 mmol/l]), hypercalcemia (15.6 mg/dl [reference range 7.2 to 12.8 mg/dl]) and elevated alanine transaminase (220
U/l [reference range 13 to 79 U/l]) and alkaline phosphatase (913 U/l [reference range 12 to 122 U/l]) activities. The total protein
was 6.4 g/dl (reference range 5.6 to 7.9 g/dl) and the albumin was 3.7 g/dl (reference range 3 to 4.5 g/dl). A stress leukogram was
also noted. The serum was moderately hemolyzed and moderately lipemic. There was no urine in the urinary bladder.
Problems identified included azotemia with hyperkalemia, hypercalcemia, elevated liver enzymes, vomiting, historical idiopathic
hyperlipidemia and unknown urine production.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
The dog had been diagnosed with idiopathic hyperlipidemia three years earlier and was being fed a low-fat, high-fiber veterinary
therapeutic food (Prescription Diet r/d Canine,a dry). No additional medications were necessary to control the hyperlipidemia.The
dog was meal fed twice daily and fresh water was always available.
Questions
1. What is the likely cause of the azotemia?
2. What is the likely cause of the hyperkalemia and hypercalcemia?
3. What parameters need to be closely monitored?
4. What treatment options need to be considered for this patient?
Answers and Discussion
1. The historical ingestion of raisins makes acute renal failure from raisin toxicity the most likely differential diagnosis for this dog.
The clinical course and laboratory abnormalities identified are characteristic of raisin toxicity. (See chapter text.) Without a urine
specific gravity, however, the possibility that this dog has pre-renal azotemia cannot be dismissed. The disproportionately high
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 240 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
244
creatinine to urea nitrogen would be less supportive of prerenal azotemia. Possible differential diagnoses to consider for this con-
stellation of clinical signs and laboratory findings could include: 1) diseases that cause hypercalcemia (neoplasia such as lym-
phoma, anal sac adenocarcinoma, parathyroid adenoma), however, the chronic nature of these diseases and the lack of previous-
ly recognized polydipsia/polyuria would make them seem unlikely, 2) hypoadrenocorticism, although the sodium concentration
was normal and the dog had a stress leukogram, 3) acute pancreatitis, however, hypocalcemia is more common than hypercal-
cemia in this disorder and the dog had a non-painful abdomen when palpated and 4) vitamin D toxicity (e.g., rodenticides, der-
matologic creams) would present with all of the changes seen in this dog; however, there was no historical evidence for this tox-
icity.
2. The hyperkalemia in this patient is caused by a combination of decreased glomerular filtration rate from the intrinsic damage to
the renal tubules and dehydration. Aldosterone deficiency (i.e., hypoadrenocorticism) is unlikely given the lack of other support-
ive evidence for that disease.
Hypercalcemia is a commonly recognized laboratory abnormality with raisin toxicity. The etiology is unknown. Other differ-
ential diagnoses for hypercalcemia include hypercalcemia of malignancy, primary hyperparathyroidism, granulomatous disease,
vitamin D toxicosis and hypoadrenocorticism. The serum calcium concentration in this dog decreased to 13.9 mg/dl 12 hours
later and to 11.3 mg/dl 36 hours later. The patient’s ionized calcium, performed when the serum calcium was 13.9 mg/dl was
normal.
3. The most critical parameters to monitor in this dog include urine production and serum potassium concentration. Urine produc-
tion can be monitored directly with placement of a urinary catheter and closed collection bag. Indirect measures of urine produc-
tion include frequent weighing of the dog and weighing of the pads in the kennel before and after urination. Placement of a cen-
tral venous catheter for measurement of central venous pressure is critical if the patient becomes oliguric or anuric to prevent
potentially life-threatening overhydration. In anuric and severely oliguric patients, serum potassium values can rise precipitously,
resulting in cardiac arrhythmias and death. Avoiding potassium-containing fluids for rehydration is important as an initial step
in an attempt to lower the serum potassium concentration. If necessary, emergency measures can be implemented including
administration of calcium gluconate, sodium bicarbonate and insulin:dextrose infusions.
4.For this patient, the first steps should be rehydration and establishing whether the dog is anuric, oliguric or polyuric. If the dog is
anuric, the best options include hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis. If the dog is oliguric, furosemide, mannitol and dopamine
may increase urine production. Patients in polyuric renal failure are easily managed as long as fluid losses are met with intravenous
fluid replacement and electrolytes are monitored to prevent hypokalemia.
Progress Notes
On the night of admission, a catheter was placed in the cephalic vein and the dog was administered 0.9% sodium chloride at 11
ml/kg/hour.The following morning the dog was still alert; however, urine production was minimal; the patient had gained 0.45 kg
(6.25%) after receiving approximately 700 ml of fluids. A serum biochemistry profile performed that morning showed that the
azotemia had worsened (urea nitrogen 68 mg/dl, creatinine 5.3 mg/dl, phosphorous 9.0 mg/dl), the hypercalcemia had improved
(13.4 mg/dl) and the hyperkalemia was essentially unchanged (6.5 mmol/l). A jugular catheter was placed that morning to moni-
tor central venous pressure.The initial pressure was measured at 5 to 6 cmH2O; however,this value increased to 10 cmH2O approx-
imately eight hours later. A urinary catheter was also placed that morning; no urine was produced over the next eight hours. The
dog became progressively depressed over that time period. A serum chemistry profile was repeated that afternoon: the urea nitro-
gen was 84 mg/dl, creatinine 6.5 mg/dl, phosphorous 12.4 mg/dl and potassium was 8.6 mmol/l.
Cardiotoxicity from the hyperkalemia was now evident, as the heart rate had decreased from 120 beats/min. to 60 beats/min.The
respiratory rate had increased to more than 80 breaths/min. and breathing was becoming more labored. The decision was made to
place catheters for peritoneal dialysis. The dog was given butorphanol (1.4 mg IV) as a preanesthetic agent and anesthesia was
induced and maintained with sevoflurane inhalation. The dog developed atrial standstill on induction and was given intravenous
sodium bicarbonate (3 ml), which temporarily resolved the cardiac dysrhythmia.Three Jackson-Pratt tubes were placed through 2-
cm incisions made in the right ventral abdomen, left ventral abdomen and along the ventral midline for use as peritoneal dialysis
catheters. No attempt was made to remove the omentum because the dog’s critical state necessitated minimal anesthesia time. Atrial
standstill developed again during the procedure; the dog was administered sodium bicarbonate (3 ml IV), 50% dextrose (5 ml IV)
and two doses of calcium gluconate (10% solution, 1.5 ml IV).
Peritoneal dialysis was initiated immediately after the dog recovered from anesthesia. A dialysate was made by placing 25 ml of
50% dextrose in 500 ml of lactated Ringer’s solution. A total of 125 ml of dialysate was infused into the abdomen every hour for
15 exchanges and allowed to remain for 40 minutes, after which it was allowed to drain for 20 minutes. The amount of dialysate
was then increased to 210 ml and was allowed a dwell time of 100 minutes. This process was repeated for the next four days, at
which time the dwell time was increased to six hours and the volume of dialysate was left at 210 ml.
A constant infusion rate of furosemide (0.1 mg/kg/hour) was started at the time of dialysis to stimulate urine production; how-
ever, the dog remained markedly oliguric (<1 ml/kg/hour) for the following three days. Urine production began to increase from
Days 4 through 6, although the dog was still considered oliguric (2 to 3 ml/kg/hour). On Day 7, the dog became markedly polyuric,
with hourly urine production of approximately 10 ml/kg/hour.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 241 ---
245
Food Safety
The dog was hospitalized for 20 days. Additional therapies administered included famotidine (0.5 mg/kg IV q12hours) to min-
imize gastric hyperacidity, cefazolin (22 mg/kg IV q8hours) for prophylaxis to prevent infection from the peritoneal dialysis
catheters and total parenteral nutrition, which was administered for seven days, at which time the dog began to eat on its own. A
biochemistry profile performed at the time of discharge revealed these values: urea nitrogen 52 mg/dl, creatinine 3.0 mg/dl and
phosphorous 11.5 mg/dl.
Because of the previously diagnosed idiopathic hyperlipidemia, a diet change was not initiated in this dog. A chitin-based phos-
phate binder (Epakitinb) was added to the food to control hyperphosphatemia. The higher protein content of the food (vs. foods
formulated for renal failure) necessitated three to four times the standard dose of phosphate binder to control hyperphosphatemia.
There was also a concern that the increased protein in the food would increase intraglomerular pressure; therefore, the dog was given
enalapril (0.25 mg/kg PO q24hours). At four months from discharge, the dog had a stable creatinine at 3.7 mg/dl, phosphorous of
6.0 mg/dl and was reported to be active and eating well.
Endnotes 
a. Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS, USA.
b. Vetoquinol, Buena, NJ, USA.
CASE 11-5
Acute Vomiting in a German Shepherd Dog
Kiko Bracker, DVM, Dipl. ACVECC
Angell Animal Medical Center
Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Patient Assessment
A nine-year-old, neutered male, German shepherd dog was examined for a three-day history of occasional vomiting and progres-
sive lethargy. The dog was uninterested in food for the past few days and was drinking excessively. Before the onset of these signs,
the dog had been healthy and no medications had been administered.
Physical examination revealed a 46-kg dog with a normal body condition score (5/9 [BCS]). Vital signs were within normal lim-
its. The dog was lethargic, but responsive and able to walk around the exam room. The abdomen was not painful and abdominal
palpation was normal.The mucous membranes were tacky and faintly icteric, as were the sclera.Thoracic auscultation was normal.
Diagnostic evaluation included a complete blood count, which showed hemoconcentration (hematocrit = 55%), and a serum bio-
chemistry panel, which revealed hyperbilirubinemia and increased liver enzyme activities (Table 1). A coagulogram showed that the
prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) were prolonged (Table 1). Results of a urinalysis were
normal except for bilirubinuria.
Abdominal radiography showed no significant abnormalities. An abdominal ultrasound found the gallbladder to be full, but
showed no dilatation of the bile ducts. The liver appeared structurally normal although a small amount of fluid was noted between
the liver lobes that could not be sampled due to its location. Because of the prolonged clotting times and concern of bleeding, no
liver biopsy or aspirates were taken. The tentative diagnosis was an acute hepatic insult of unknown cause.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
The dog had been eating the same brand of dry dog food for several years.The exact daily caloric intake was unknown because the
dog was fed free choice. Upon further questioning, the owner admitted the dog had been eating a food that was identified as being
contaminated with aflatoxin. Based on national recall information, a primary rule out of aflatoxin toxicosis was established.
Questions
1. What method of delivering nutrition to this patient is most appropriate during its hospitalization?
2. How can a diagnosis of aflatoxicosis be confirmed?
3. Is there a specific antidote for this toxin?
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 242 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
246
Answers and Discussion
1. For patients that are not vomiting, enteral feeding is the method of choice because it increases mucosal blood flow, preserves ente-
rocyte function and decreases bacterial translocation from the intestinal tract. This dog was vomiting; therefore, enteral feeding
would likely worsen its nausea. Additionally, placement of a feeding tube (nasoesophageal tube, esophagostomy tube, gastrosto-
my tube, etc.) carries the risk of hemorrhage because the patient was found to be hypocoagulable. Administration of parenteral
nutrition (PN) is the most appropriate method of providing nutrition to this patient.
2. A sample of the contaminated food can be submitted to a diagnostic lab for analysis. Alternatively, a fresh or frozen sample of
hepatic tissue may be used to identify the presence of aflatoxin by thin-layer chromatography or high-performance liquid chro-
matography; however, the toxin may be eliminated from the body in 24 hours; therefore, these tests are often negative. Formalin
preserved liver tissue can be submitted for histologic evaluation because the histologic changes (diffuse lipidosis and hepatocel-
lular necrosis) are fairly unique to this toxin in dogs.
3. There is no antidote for aflatoxin toxicosis. Aggressive treatment to support the liver and treat signs of liver failure are recom-
mended.
Progress Notes
The dog was treated in two hospitals for five days. Although the specific treatments at both hospitals differed slightly, the goals
were the same: 1) intravenous fluid support, 2) replacement of clotting factors with fresh frozen plasma and supplementation with
vitamin K1, 3) use of gastroprotectants to minimize gastrointestinal ulceration (omeprazole, famotidine), 4) antiemetic therapy
(metoclopramide, dolasetron), 5) nutritional support, 6) antioxidants and antioxidant precursors to minimize damage to the liver
(N-acetylcysteine, Denosyl,a vitamins E and C) and 7) prophylactic antibiotics (ampicillin) to minimize the chance of infection due
to intestinal bacterial translocation and incompetent hepatic immune function.
Occasional hematemesis occurred during the first two days of hospitalization. Although the patient was offered several different
types of dog food, it refused to eat. Therefore, it was occasionally syringe fed 100 ml of a highly palatable, homogenized veterinary
therapeutic food (Prescription Diet a/d Canine/Feline b). Although this food is relatively calorie dense (1.4 kcal/ml), the dog’s rest-
ing energy requirement (RER) was much higher (70 x (46 kg)0.75 = RER = 1,236 kcal/day). Furthermore, the dog’s vomiting made
enteral feeding impractical.
On the third day of hospitalization, PN was started through a peripheral catheter. A central line was not used due to concerns
about hemorrhage. The PN was formulated to contain a minimum of amino acids (1.0 g/100 kcal), due to the liver’s inability to
process ammonia derived from deamination of amino acids.
In several separate infusions, the dog received 1,170 ml of fresh frozen plasma (24 ml/kg) to replace clotting factors. This treat-
ment improved the dog’s clotting times. Nonetheless, the patient’s clinical condition deteriorated; the dog became weaker, vomit-
ed more often and began to have bloody diarrhea. Hepatic encephalopathy was suspected on the fifth day of hospitalization.Within
two hours the patient underwent cardiac arrest and died.
Table 1. Biochemistry and clotting values for a nine-year-old German shepherd dog.
Test
Day 1
Day 5
Reference values
ALP (IU/l)
124
221
71-120
AST (IU/l)
ND
502
13-50
ALT (IU/l)
194
885
21-97
Bilirubin (mg/dl)
8.2
23.2
0.1-0.3
Albumin (g/dl)
2.7
2.2
3.1-4.2
PT (seconds)
70
24.5
7.3-11.8
aPTT (seconds)
>100
28.4
10.6-14.8
Key: ALP = alkaline phosphatase, AST = aspartate aminotransferase, ND = not done, ALT = alanine aminotransferase, PT = prothrombin time,
aPTT = activated partial thromboplastin time.
Endnotes
a. Nutramax Laboratories, Inc., Edgewood, MD, USA.
b. Hill’s Pet Nutrition Inc., Topeka, KS, USA.
Bibliography
Hooser SB, Talcott PA. In: Peterson ME, Talcott PA, eds. Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Inc, 2006;
889-892.
Marik PE, Zaloga GP. Early enteral nutrition in acutely ill patients: A systematic review. Critical Care Medicine 2001; 29: 2264-
2270.
Proulx J. Nutrition in critically ill animals. In: Raffe MR, Wingfield WE, eds. The Veterinary ICU Book, 1st ed. Jackson, WY:
Teton NewMedia, 2002; 202-217.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 243 ---
CASE 11-6
Azotemia in a Cat
Candace Berkshire, DVM
Washington State University
Pullman, Washington, USA
Patient Assessment
A 10-year-old, castrated male domestic shorthair cat was enrolled in a cohort of blood donor cats. Initial diagnostics at enrollment
included testing for feline leukemia virus, feline immunodeficiency virus, heartworm, toxoplasmosis, haemobartonellosis, bartonel-
losis and ehrlichiosis. Prior medical history included mild periodontal disease, constipation that resolved with lactulose treatment
and, recently, forelimb lameness.
The patient was fed a high-protein therapeutic food for more than a year. When the food was listed as a product recalled due to
contaminated wheat gluten, the cat was examined for possible adverse effects. Physical examination findings were within normal
limits, although the cat was less active than usual. Results from a serum biochemistry profile indicated that the patient was azotemic,
with blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine values of 66 mg/dl and 3.3 mg/dl, respectively. Urine collected by cystocentesis had
a specific gravity of 1.018, with many crystals, originally thought to be ammonium urate (Figure 1). An abdominal ultrasound was
performed; pathologic changes included hydronephrosis of the left kidney, bilateral nephrocalcinosis, fluid surrounding the left kid-
ney and a large amount of gravity-dependent sediment in the urinary bladder. A peripheral intravenous catheter was placed and
fluid therapy was initiated. Therapy included intravenous fluids, a histamine receptor antagonist (famotidinea) and lactulose.
The patient was transitioned to a therapeutic food targeted for management of renal disease (Prescription Diet k/d Felineb).
Despite therapy, lethargy, anorexia and the degree of azotemia continued to progress for several days (Figures 2 and 3). A central
intravenous catheter was placed for delivery of fluids and measurement of central venous pressure. Urine output was monitored by
routinely weighing litter box contents. Urine volume was large and dilute; therefore, the patient was classified as polyuric. Following
four days of fluid and drug therapy, BUN and creatinine values decreased markedly. Renal panels were repeated daily; the azotemia
continued to improve over the following five days. After 10 days of treatment for acute renal failure (ARF), the cat was transitioned
to subcutaneous fluids, therapy with famotidine was discontinued; however, the renal therapeutic food was continued. After the
acute crisis, azotemia resolved in three weeks.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
When enrolled in the blood donor program, the cat was fed an adult feline maintenance food. Approximately one year before the
pet food recall, the patient and its cohorts were transitioned to a high-protein, low-carbohydrate food (Prescription Diet m/d
Felineb). Food was administered in measured amounts by kennel staff twice daily. As mentioned above, the cat was fed Prescription
Diet k/d Feline when it was affected with ARF.
Questions
1. Could ARF be related to contamination of pet food with a toxic agent?
2. How can ARF be differentiated from chronic renal failure?
3. What treatment plan(s) should be considered for suspected cases of ARF?
4. What are some risks following successful treatment of ARF?
Answers and Discussion
1. In March 2007, a massive recall of pet food was instituted following reports of renal failure in animals following a palatability
trial. Over several weeks, many contaminants were considered. Melamine was isolated from pet food ingredients, pet food and
renal and urine samples from affected patients. In vitro studies demonstrated that melamine, when combined with a similar moi-
ety (i.e., cyanuric acid), would form crystals in cat or dog urine. ARF was thought to result from severe crystalluria, similar to
ARF in ethylene glycol cases.
In December 2005, a pet food manufacturing company issued a similar recall because aflatoxin was identified as the cause of
severe hepatic necrosis and cirrhosis in dogs. Ten years earlier, in 1995, pet food was recalled for excessive levels of vomitoxin in
pet food.
Product contamination should be considered in unexplained acute disease, particularly if the incidence of that disease process
increases dramatically and other causes have been ruled out. Reputable pet food manufacturers conduct multiple tests on raw
ingredients and finished products and can provide immediate information about calls involving products to their toll-free num-
bers. When the pet food recall was instituted, renal failure caused by melamine ingestion was undocumented, and the agent was
considered relatively nontoxic. In cases of unexplained acute illness, exposures to toxins, whether environmental or in pet food
247
Food Safety
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 244 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
248
should be documented.
2. The most obvious differences between
acute and chronic renal failure are the
speed of onset and duration of signs. In
ARF, signs appear rapidly with illness
usually lasting less than one week. ARF
patients are oliguric or anuric, whereas
animals with chronic renal failure are
usually polyuric. However, normal or
increased urine production should not
be used to rule out ARF. In cases of
acute uremia,
mucous membranes
remain pink, as opposed to pale mucous
membranes and anemia often noted in
chronic renal failure. Mineral and electrolyte imbalances may
also be more apparent in cases of ARF, and may include
hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. Patients with chron-
ic renal disease also show outward signs of chronic disease
including poor body condition and coat, whereas patients
with ARF generally present with good body condition and a
normal coat.
3. Management of ARF is multifactorial. Immediate actions
should include removing the inciting source, in this case, dis-
continuing use of the contaminated food. Fluid therapy
should be instituted to correct extracellular fluid imbalances
and deficits. After replacement fluids have been administered
and adequate hydration achieved, fluid therapy should con-
tinue with respect to maintenance and continued fluid loss.
Diuresis is the optimal method of preventing medullary
tubule blockage by crystals. To prevent further acid-base
derangements, gastric protectants should be administered,
and continued for two to three weeks, until uremic gastritis
has been effectively controlled. Caloric intake should be care-
fully monitored. Uremia and metabolic acidosis can induce
protein catabolism, which is compounded by anorexia and
vomiting. Patients should be routinely weighed to evaluate
weight loss, although this measure can be confounded by
changes in hydration status and lean body mass. A low-pro-
tein, low-phosphorus food is typically recommended for ure-
mic patients.The protein should be highly digestible, and the
food should have increased amounts of fat to increase caloric
density. Whenever possible, enteral feeding methods should
be employed to promote gastrointestinal health.
4. Risks associated with acute uremia include derangements of
fluid balance, electrolyte imbalances and cardiovascular and
pulmonary complications. If morphologic changes are not
treated and reversed during the recovery phase, acute uremia
can progress to chronic renal failure. Overaggressive fluid
therapy can potentially result in volume overload, leading to
hypertension and pulmonary edema. Care should be taken to
continually assess the hydration status of the patient.
Progress Notes
The patient was assessed and diagnostic studies were conducted to detect ARF before the onset of clinical signs. Due to aggressive
treatment, the patient recovered fully within three weeks. The patient was discharged from the blood donor program and given to
a private owner. At the time of discharge, the cat’s BUN and creatinine concentrations had decreased to normal limits, and no signs
of renal disease were present.The cat was bright, alert and responsive and fully recovered. Recommendations were made to contin-
Figure 1. Melamine/cyanuric crystals produced in vitro (left). Crystal from the urine of an
affected cat (Magnification 1,000x) (right).
Figure 2. Creatinine changes during ARF.
Figure 3. BUN changes during ARF.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 245 ---
249
Food Safety
ue feeding the therapeutic kidney food, due to the patient’s increased risk for developing chronic renal disease at a later date.
Lactulose treatment was continued, and considered unrelated to the ARF episode.
Acknowledgement
The author thanks Dr. Amy Tamulevicus of the Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Kansas State University, Manhattan, for providing
clinical information about this patient.
Endnotes
a. Pepcid. Merck & Co., West Point, Pennsylvania, USA.
b. Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS, USA.
Bibliography
Cowgill LD, Francey T. Acute uremia. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine: Diseases of the
Dog and Cat, 6th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2005; 1731-1751.
Grauer G. Early detection of renal damage and disease in dogs and cats. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal
Practice 2005; 35: 581-596.
Interim melamine and analogues safety/risk assessment. U.S. Food and Drug Administration Center for Food Safety and Applied
Nutrition. www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/melamra.html.
Lees G. Early diagnosis of renal disease and renal failure. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 2004; 34:
867-885.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 246 ---
CLINICAL IMPORTANCE
Much has changed in our perception and use of dogs over the
past half century. Our society has moved from an agrarian
phase into a postindustrial phase with a concomitant shift of
the human population into urban settings. Dogs have, by
necessity, made the shift to urban living along with us and in
doing so we have discovered their remarkable adaptability and
versatility.
Dogs have found a job in virtually every niche of society.
Dogs have been useful in law enforcement, as nursing home
companions, in the military, in drug enforcement, as para-
plegic assistants and in search and rescue. The human-animal
bond has become a commonly taught subject in veterinary
schools, which testifies to the importance of animals, includ-
ing dogs, for our mental and physical well-being.The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) describe some of
the health benefits of pet ownership, including decreased
blood pressure, cholesterol levels, triglyceride levels and feel-
ings of loneliness and increased opportunities for exercise,
outdoor activities and socialization (2006). Many organiza-
tions support the health benefits of pet ownership including
the American Veterinary Medical Association, The Delta
Society and the National Institutes of Health; these organiza-
tions and others have issued statements or provided informa-
tion supporting the health benefits of pet ownership.
According to this national poll of working Americans 18
years of age and over, nearly one in five U.S. companies allow
pets at work. A majority of those polled believe pets at work
provide benefits such as relieving stress, improving relation-
ships with coworkers, making for a happier workforce and
creating a happier work environment (CDC, 2006). Another
health benefit for both dogs and people is related to exercise
and weight loss. When overweight people and overweight
pets exercise together, they both have lower dropout rates
from their weight-loss programs (Jewell et al, 2004).
The emphasis on dogs as valued members of society (Box 12-
1) has driven the development of canine nutrition towards the
same goals we strive for in human nutrition: long life, high
quality life and enhanced performance.
Demographics
Globally, pet ownership has increased, possibly due to reduced
human birth rates, changing family structure and aging popu-
lations (Anonymous,1997).Regardless of a pet’s size or species,
pet owners consider their pet to be a family member. One sur-
vey indicated that 63% of the U.S. population own pets. There
are nearly 75 million dogs in the U.S. Furthermore, 45% of U.S.
households own dogs; this equates to approximately 1.7 dogs
per household (AAMA, 2007). Table 12-1 lists countries with
the most prevalent dog ownership. Breed popularity varies from
year to year and from region to region; however, some breeds
always appear to be more desired than others (Table 12-2).
Worldwide, mixed-breed and crossbred dogs are most popular.
Chapter
12
Introduction to 
Feeding Normal Dogs
Jacques Debraekeleer
Kathy L. Gross
Steven C. Zicker
“What dogs? These are my children, little people with fur 
who make my heart open a little wider.”
Oprah Winfrey 
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 247 ---
The terms “mixed breed” and “crossbred” have slightly different
meanings. Mixed-breed dogs’ ancestry might not be discern-
able, whereas breeders often plan crossbreeding by mating two
different purebred dogs.
Coinciding with increasing numbers of pets, from 2001 to
2006, sales of commercial pet foods increased 5.4% in the U.S.
and more than 10% worldwide. In the U.S., the trend is for
less pet food to be sold through grocery stores and more
through specialty and mass merchandisers. Packaged dry dog
foods are almost universally fed by dog owners (95% of dog
owners) compared to canned food use (34% of dog owners)
(Packaged Facts, 2006). This highly competitive market and
increased demand, coupled with the importance of nutrition
to the health and performance of dogs, make it necessary for
practicing veterinarians to understand not only the basics, but
also the subtleties of canine nutrition to make knowledgeable
recommendations to clients about optimal feeding programs.
Species Diversity 
The modern domestic canine species encompasses a vast
number of breeds each with its own genetic idiosyncrasies
(Fogle, 1997). Using genomic techniques (microsatellite
genotyping), the genetic similarities of 85 modern breeds
were organized into four distinct groups. The breeds in each
of the four groups had similar geographic origins, morphol-
ogy or role in human activities (Parker et al, 2004). The vari-
ety of dog breeds has arisen out of selection efforts by people
to produce animals with specific traits that may enhance per-
formance, show or behavioral characteristics (Table 12-3).
The result is a species that displays a wide variety of mor-
phology; head shape, size, coat characteristics (color, length,
etc.) and musculoskeletal structure. By selecting for these
traits, we have probably unknowingly selected for variations
in metabolism and nutrient usage as has been evidenced in
other species. Our knowledge about breed variation in
metabolism and nutrient requirements is growing.
Furthermore, nutrigenomic technologies create a potential
for an even better understanding of breed-specific nutrition
(Chapter 4). Nutrigenomics is currently applied to many
species including people (Swanson et al, 2003). Because dogs
are good models for certain human diseases, the outcome will
be an increasing body of knowledge about metabolism and
nutrition of the diverse canid species. A common unifying
theme is dogs are omnivores.
DOGS AS OMNIVORES
The word carnivore can be used to indicate either a taxonomic
classification or a type of feeding behavior.The order Carnivora
is quite diverse (Table 12-4) and consists of 12 families contain-
ing more than 260 species. Omnivorous and carnivorous feed-
ing behaviors are most common among members of the order
Carnivora; however, the order also includes species that are her-
bivores (e.g., pandas) (Corbet and Hill, 1986; Morris and
Rogers, 1983, 1989).
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
252
Table 12-1. Comparisons of dog populations in 
selected countries.*
Country
Pet dog population
USA
61,080,000
Brazil
30,051,000
China
22,908,000
Japan 
9,600,000
Russia
9,600,000
South Africa
9,100,000
France
8,150,000
Italy
7,600,000
Poland
7,520,000
Thailand 
6,900,000
*Source: Infobase Pvt. Ltd.
A majority of American households (62%) own at least one pet,
but virtually everyone, more than nine in 10, considers his or her
pet a member of the family. Here are some other interesting facts
about dog ownership.
• 70% of owners said they give their dogs presents at Christmas.
• 22% of owners celebrate their dogs’ birthday by giving a spe-
cial treat, making a special meal, giving their dog a cake, ice
cream, a new toy, a new bone, singing happy birthday, throw-
ing a birthday party with other dogs, taking their dog to a
favorite place or taking photographs.
• More than 50% of American dog owners are more attached to
their pets than to at least one other person; 36% say they are
more attached to their dog than their best friend and 12% say
they are more attached to their dog than their spouse.
• 25% of owners let their dog sleep either on top of or in their
bed.
The Bibliography for Box 12-1 can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
Box 12-1. People Treat their Dogs like
Family Members.
Table 12-2. Ten most popular dog breeds registered by 
the American Kennel Club in 1996 compared with their 
popularity in 2005.
1996*
2005**
Breed
Rank
Number
Rank
Number
Labrador retriever
1
149,505
1
137,867
Rottweiler
2
89,867
16
15,916
German shepherd dog
3
79,076
4
45,014
Golden retriever
4
68,993
2
48,509
Beagle
5
56,946
5
42,592
Poodle
6
56,803
8
31,638
Dachshund
7
48,426
6
38,566
Cocker spaniel
8
45,305
15
16,343
Yorkshire terrier
9
40,216
3
47,238
Pomeranian
10
39,712
14
19,511
*Adapted from U.S. Pet Ownership & Demographics
Sourcebook. Schaumburg, IL: Center for Information
Management, American Veterinary Medical Association, 1997;
32-35.
**American Kennel Club Registration Statistics, 2005.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 248 ---
Eating Behavior
Several researchers have examined the eating habits of wolves
(Canis lupus), the nearest ancestors of our domestic dogs, and
close relatives such as coyotes (Canis latrans). Both are oppor-
tunistic predators and scavengers, hunting and eating what is
available regionally (Sheldon, 1992). Coyotes eat carrion and
hunt rodents, other small mammals, birds, amphibians and
other species (Sheldon, 1992; Landry and Van Kruiningen,
1979). Additionally, they have been reported to consume drop-
pings of herbivorous prey; domestic dogs also will readily con-
sume herbivore feces (Lewis et al, 1987). Regional ungulates
such as buffalo, deer, elk, moose, wildebeest, antelope and zebra
are the natural prey of wolves (Sheldon, 1992; Landry and Van
Kruiningen, 1979). Viscera are typically consumed; therefore,
partially digested vegetable material is a normal part of the
wolf’s diet (Beaver, 1981). Both coyotes and wolves also eat
plant matter such as fruits, berries, persimmons, mushrooms
and melons (Sheldon, 1992; Landry and Van Kruiningen,
1979; Röhrs, 1987). Similarly, dogs are opportunistic eaters and
have developed anatomic and physiologic characteristics that
permit digestion and usage of a varied diet.
Anatomy and Physiology
Oral Cavity
The oral cavity functions to decrease the physical size of food
for introduction into the rest of the alimentary tract.
Decreasing the physical size of food creates particles small
enough to pass through the esophagus and increases the surface
area of the food, which enhances enzymatic digestion in the
stomach and small intestine. Dogs have cutting canine teeth for
ripping and tearing and molar teeth with large occlusal tables
for crushing, which are associated teleologically with the capac-
ity to use plant material (Figure 12-1) (Morris and Rogers,
1989). Dogs may fix large pieces of food with their paws to tear
off small pieces with their cutting canine teeth, after which the
food particle is advanced to the back of the oral cavity where it
may be crushed by the molar teeth and mixed with saliva before
being swallowed (Meyer, 1990).
Stomach
Wild canids typically eat large meals, usually infrequently, due
to intermittent food availability. Dogs may consume their daily
energy requirement in one or two large rapidly ingested meals
(Ruckebusch et al, 1991). This eating pattern means that the
stomach must be able to expand markedly. On average, a medi-
um-sized, adult domestic dog has the capacity to ingest 30 to
35 g of dry matter per kg body weight per day (Meyer, 1990a;
Meyer et al, 1980). However, the canine stomach can adjust,
within limits, to accommodate the amount of food ingested
and can hold 1 to 9 liters depending on the breed (Schummer
and Nickel, 1960).
Small and Large Intestine
The characteristics of the canine small intestine are consistent
with those of animals that digest an omnivorous diet (Morris
and Rogers, 1989).The small intestine composes approximate-
ly 23% of the total gastrointestinal (GI) volume of dogs
(Ruckebusch et al, 1991) vs. 15% for cats (Wolter, 1982). The
ratio of GI tract length to total body length is 6:1 for dogs, 4:1
for cats, 10:1 for rabbits and as high as 20:1 for some herbivores
(Morris and Rogers, 1989; Meyer, 1990; Wolter, 1982). This
anatomic relationship is consistent with ingestion of an omniv-
orous diet with intermediate digestibility (i.e., between low
digestible herbaceous forages and highly digestible animal
flesh). Dogs digest starch effectively via pancreatic enzymes and
mucosal disaccharidases.
Nutrient Requirements and Metabolism
Much can be learned about an animal’s nutritional require-
ments simply by analyzing its natural food source. True carni-
vores, such as cats, are limited to what is available from prey tis-
sues such as skeletal muscle and liver to provide energy and
nutrients, including protein, taurine, arginine, arachidonic acid
and niacin. Consequently, carnivorous animals (e.g., cats)
developed more efficient pathways to use these nutrients, and
have lost the ability or have a decreased ability to synthesize
them from precursors (Chapter 19). Being omnivorous and
feeding on a varied diet of plant and animal tissue, dogs main-
tained or improved the ability to synthesize nutrients from pre-
cursors. These differences lend more evidence to early evolu-
tionary divergence (Martin, 1989) and further support the
premise that dogs are omnivores.
Table 12-5 compares the recommendations for daily nutrient
intake of adult dogs to the nutrient content of meat (ground
beef). This comparison confirms that an all-meat food would
be unbalanced for dogs. Specific aspects of nutritional require-
ments of dogs are discussed in Chapters 5 and 6 and Chapters
13 through 18.
LIFESTAGE NUTRITION
Lifestage nutrition is the practice of feeding animals foods
designed to meet their optimal nutritional needs at a specific
age or physiologic state (e.g., maintenance, reproduction,
growth or senior).The concept of lifestage nutrition recognizes
that feeding either below or above an optimal nutrient range
can negatively affect biologic performance or health (Chapters
253
Introduction to Feeding Normal Dogs
Table 12-3. Examples of various functions dogs perform 
in society.
Assisting hearing or physically impaired persons
Entertainment
Guiding blind persons
Herding
Hunting
Military and law enforcement
Pets
Racing (sprint or endurance)
Rescue operations
Show and breeding
Social interactions
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 249 ---
5 and 6). This concept differs markedly from feeding a single
product for “all lifestages” (all-purpose foods) in which nutri-
ents are added at levels to meet the highest potential need (usu-
ally growth and reproduction). Adult animals at maintenance
are always provided nutrients well in excess of their biologic
needs when fed all-purpose foods. Because the goals in nutri-
tion are to feed for optimal health, performance and longevity,
feeding foods designed to more closely meet individual needs is
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
254
Table 12-4. Taxonomy and natural feeding behavior of the order Carnivora.*
Family
Canidae
Ursidae
Procyonidae
Ailuropodidae
Mustelidae
Viverridae
Feeding behavior
Omnivores
Omnivores
Omnivores
Herbivores
Carnivores
Omnivores
Carnivores
Omnivores
No. of species
35
7
13
2
63
35
Examples
Dogs
Bears
Raccoons
Pandas
Weasels
Genets
Jackals
Coatis
Polecats
Civets
Coyotes
Kinkajou
Mink
Linsangs
Foxes
Olingos
Ferrets
Wolves
Martens
Wolverine
Badgers
Skunks
Otters
Family
Herpestidae
Hyaenidae
Felidae
Otariidae
Odobenidae
Phocidae
Feeding behavior
Carnivores
Carnivores
Carnivores
Carnivores
Carnivores
Carnivores
Omnivores
No. of species
37
4
36
14
1
19
Examples
Mongooses
Hyenas
Leopards
Eared seals
Walrus
Earless seals
Meerkats
Pumas
Sea lions
Cats
Ocelots
Serval
Jaguars
Lynxes
Bobcats
Lions
Tigers
Cheetahs
*Adapted from Corbet GB, Hill JE. A World List of Mammalian Species. New York, NY: Facts on File Publications, 1986; 105-121. Nowak
RM, Paradiso JL. Walker’s Mammals of the World, 4th ed. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983. Ridgway SH,
Harrison RJ. Handbook of Marine Mammals. New York, NY: Academic Press Inc, 1981.
Table 12-5. Comparison between the recommended daily allowances of selected nutrients for a 10-kg adult dog and the 
nutrient content of meat (beef).*
Regular ground beef
RDA
Amount meeting the DER of a 10-kg dog
Nutrient
10-kg dog
per 100 g
482 g
% of RDA
Adequacy
Metabolizable energy (kcal)
650
135
650
100
Yes
Moisture (ml)
650
60
289
44
na
Protein (g)
24
17
82
341
No
Fat (g)
≥8
20
96
1,204
No
Calcium (mg)
1,000
10
48
5
No
Phosphorus (mg)
750
200
963
128
Maybe
Ca/P ratio
1:1-2:1
1:20
1:20
na
No
Sodium (mg)
250-500
70
337
100
Yes
Potassium (mg)
550
325
1,565
285
No
Magnesium (mg)
150
25
120
80
Maybe
Iron (mg)
14
3.25
16
112
Yes
Copper (mg)
1
0.05
0.2
24
No
Zinc (mg)
10
1.5
7
70
No
Iodine (mg)
0.15
0.003
0.014
10
No
Key: RDA = recommended daily allowance, DER = daily energy requirement, na = not applicable, Yes = meets the optimal recommenda-
tions, Maybe = does not meet the optimal recommendations, but is neither deficient nor excessive, No = deficient or excessive.
*Adapted from Gesellschaft für Ernährungsphysiologie Ausschuß für Bedarfsnormen. Energie-und Nährstoffbedarf Nr. 5 Hunde. Frankfurt,
Germany: DLG Verlag, 1989. Meyer H, Heckötter E. Futterwerttabellen für Hunde und Katzen. Hannover, Germany: Schlütersche
Verlaganstalt und Druckerei, 1986. National Research Council. Nutrient Requirements of Dogs. Washington, DC: National Academy Press,
1985. Randoin L, Le Gallic P, Dupuis Y, et al. Tables de composition des aliments. Institut Scientifique d’Hygiène Alimentaire, 6th ed.
Malakoff, France: LT Editions J. Lanore, 1990. Watt BK, Merrill AL. Composition of Foods-Raw, Processed, Prepared. Agriculture
Handbook No 8.Washington, DC: Agricultural Research Service, USDA, 1975.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 250 ---
preferred. This philosophy is
the central tenant to lifestage
nutrition and preventive medi-
cine. In addition to providing
advice about basic nutritional
requirements of their patients,
veterinarians should assess and
minimize the nutrition-related
health risks at each lifestage.
For maximal benefit,
risk
assessment and prevention
plans should begin well before
the onset of disease.
The value of lifestage feeding
is enhanced if risk factor man-
agement is incorporated into
the feeding practice. In many
instances, when the nutritional
needs associated with a dog’s
age and physiologic state are
combined with the nutritional
goals of disease risk factor reduction, a more narrow, but opti-
mal, range of nutrient recommendations results. For example,
essentially all commercial dog foods sold in the U.S. meet or
exceed the Association of American Feed Control Officials
(AAFCO) minimum nutrient requirements for dog foods.
Regulatory agencies such as AAFCO ensure ingredient safety
and nutritional adequacy. However, even foods that are nutri-
tionally adequate may have levels of certain nutrients outside a
desired range for disease risk factor reduction or optimal per-
formance (these nutrients are nutrients of concern). As men-
tioned in Chapter 1, besides nutrients of concern, specific food
factors such as digestibility and texture can also affect health
and modify disease risk.Together, nutrients of concern and spe-
cific food factors are referred to as key nutritional factors. The
key nutritional factors for commercial foods for different
lifestages of healthy dogs will be discussed in Chapters 13
through 18, including those associated with reducing the risk of
specific diseases and those involved with optimizing perform-
ance during different physiologic states.
Homemade foods, unlike commercial foods, are not regulat-
ed.Thus, unless experts in canine nutrition have formulated the
recipes from which they are made, there are no assurances that
homemade foods will provide adequate nutrition or that the
ingredients used to make them are safe for dogs (Chapter 10).
However, even if the recipes for homemade foods ensure nutri-
tional adequacy and ingredient safety, key nutritional factors
should also be considered, depending on the lifestage of the dog
being fed.
In sequence, the chapters that follow cover Feeding Young
Adult Dogs: Before Middle Age, Feeding Mature Adult Dogs:
Middle Aged and Older, Feeding Reproducing Dogs, Feeding
Nursing and Orphaned Puppies from Birth to Weaning and
Feeding Growing Puppies: Postweaning to Adulthood. The
next chapter begins with feeding young adult dogs because
most dogs are adults, and the nutrient needs of adult dogs serve
as a good basis for comparing nutrient needs for other
lifestages. Chapter 18 covers recommendations for feeding
adult working and sporting dogs for optimal physical and olfac-
tory performance.
REFERENCES
The references for Chapter 12 can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
255
Introduction to Feeding Normal Dogs
Figure 12-1. Maxillary dentition and palate of a dog (left).
Mandibular dentition and sublingual mucosa of the same dog
(right). These photographs demonstrate tooth anatomy associated
with an omnivorous eating behavior. The cuspid (canine) teeth are
long and cutting and are used for capturing and puncturing prey.
The maxillary and mandibular premolar teeth interdigitate and pro-
vide a shearing action. The carnassial teeth (upper fourth premolar
and lower first molar) have broad occlusal surfaces and are used
for grinding and chewing. (Adapted with permission from Harvey
CE, Emily PP. Function, formation, and anatomy of oral structures
in carnivores. Small Animal Dentistry. St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year
Book Inc, 1993.)
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 251 ---
INTRODUCTION
Depending on breed, dogs one through five to seven years of
age are generally considered young adults.They are usually fully
grown (about 12 months old for most breeds) but are not yet
middle aged. In people, middle age is often considered to coin-
cide with the third quarter of the average lifespan. Other than
obesity and periodontal disease, this age range represents a rel-
atively healthy period in a dog’s life. Generally, many of the
more common mortal diseases are more often diagnosed in
middle-aged or older dogs.
The goals of nutritional management for young adult dogs
are to maximize longevity and quality of life (disease preven-
tion). A basic premise is that the foods fed should be nutritious;
they should provide the recommended allowances of all known
required nutrients. Most regulated commercial foods provide
all the necessary nutrients in amounts that avoid deficiencies
(Chapter 9). However, to meet the feeding goals described
above, nutritional recommendations must exceed simply pre-
venting diseases associated with nutrient deficiencies.
Nutritional recommendations for people living in affluent
countries include nutrient and food recommendations that help
prevent important diseases such as obesity, diabetes mellitus,
cardiovascular disease, cancer, Alzheimer’s disease and others.
Thus, as in people, optimal feeding plans for pet dogs should
include recommendations for specific nutrients and non-nutri-
ent food ingredients (key nutritional factors) that influence
important canine diseases. Table 13-1 lists the important
health concerns that may be positively affected by proper nutri-
tional management in this age group of dogs. To achieve these
feeding goals, besides selecting the best food, the food needs to
be properly fed (amounts and methods).
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
Patient assessment should be a structured process that
includes: 1) obtaining accurate and detailed medical and
nutritional histories, 2) reviewing the medical record, 3) con-
ducting a physical examination and 4) evaluating results of
laboratory and other diagnostic tests. During assessment, the
feeding goals should be established and explained, risk factors
for nutrition-related diseases considered and key nutritional
factors identified.
History and Physical Examination
Often, in a typical busy clinical setting, the time available to
obtain a dietary history and conduct a physical examination is
limited. However, a minimum dietary database for all canine
patients should be obtained and include: 1) the type of food fed
(homemade, commercial, dry, moist, semi-moist, etc.), 2)
recipes if homemade food represents the majority of the diet, 3)
brand names of commercial foods, if known, 4) names of sup-
plements, treats and snacks and 5) method of feeding (free
Chapter
13
Feeding Young Adult Dogs:
Before Middle Age
Jacques Debraekeleer
Kathy L. Gross
Steven C. Zicker
“If you get to thinking you’re a person of some influence, 
try ordering somebody else’s dog around.”
Will Rogers
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 252 ---
choice, meal feeding, etc.). An extended dietary database
includes: 6) quantities fed, 7) recent changes in food type,
intake and preferences, 8) access to food for other pets or live-
stock, 9) who in the family buys food for the pet, 10) who in the
family feeds the pet and 11) appetite changes with estimates of
magnitude and duration. The general type and level of activity
(e.g., house pet, confined to kennel, working dog, etc.) and
neuter status should be noted because these factors are impor-
tant determinants of energy requirements. The dietary history
should be expanded if nutrition-related problems such as obe-
sity are identified in the initial evaluation of the patient.
Body weight, body condition score (BCS) (Chapter 1), oral
health and overall appearance of the skin and coat of all adult
dogs should be assessed and recorded in the medical record.
These parameters are general indicators of nutritional adequa-
cy. An otherwise healthy young adult dog with normal body
weight, skin and coat and BCS (2.5/5 to 3.5/5) and no evidence
of significant dental disease is unlikely to need further nutri-
tional assessment. However, for purposes of disease prevention,
nutritional intervention, such as switching to a food that
matches the recommended levels of key nutritional factors, may
be warranted.The health concerns listed in Table 13-1 are dis-
cussed in the risk factor review that follows.
Gender and Neuter Status
No controlled studies have been performed to delineate differ-
ences in nutritional requirements of intact male vs. intact
female dogs. It may be presumed that, like other mammals,
intact females require less caloric intake than intact males. If
this assumption is true it is probably because of gender-related
differences in lean body mass. Lean body mass accounts for
nearly all of an animal’s resting energy requirement (RER)
(Blaxter, 1989). Women require fewer calories than men
because of a lower relative amount of lean body mass than men
(Pellett, 1990). One study showed that female dogs had an
average of 16% more body fat than male dogs (Meyer and
Stadtfeld, 1980). Surveys have found a much higher prevalence
of overweight and obese conditions in female than male dogs
(Figure 13-1) (Edney and Smith, 1986; Mason, 1970). These
findings suggest that intact female dogs may need fewer calo-
ries than intact males.
Obesity occurs twice as often in neutered dogs than in repro-
ductively intact dogs (Figure 13-1) (Edney and Smith, 1986).
Very little is known, however, about the pathophysiology of this
phenomenon. Neutering does not appear to have a marked
impact on the resting energy expenditure of female dogs
(Anantharaman-Barr, 1990); however, it may significantly
increase food intake (Houpt et al, 1979). The increased food
intake in neutered bitches is thought to be a consequence of a
reduction of appetite-suppressing estrogen activity (Houpt et
al, 1979; O’Farrell and Peachey, 1990). A decrease in physical
activity is also assumed to occur in many dogs after neutering
and may play a more important role in male dogs because of
decreased roaming (Hopkins et al, 1976; Lewis, 1978). The
daily energy intake should be limited to prevent rapid weight
gain in neutered dogs; 1.6 x RER is a good starting point. For
some breeds and individual dogs, it may be necessary to lower
the energy intake of neutered dogs to 1.2 to 1.4 x RER
(Chapters 1 and 5).
Breed
The breed classification should be determined in the initial
assessment. Different breeds may be at risk for specific diseases
or metabolic alterations that require nutritional management.
As an example, certain canine breeds appear to be predisposed
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
258
Table 13-1. Important diseases for adult dogs that have 
nutritional associations.*
Disease/
Incidence/prevalence/
health concern
mortality/pet owner concern
Dental disease
Most prevalent disease; numerous
associated health risks (e.g.kidney disease)
Obesity
Approximate 30% prevalence; associated
health risks (e.g., diabetes mellitus,
musculoskeletal disease); major concern
Kidney disease
Second leading cause of non-accidental
death; major concern
Arthritis
6% prevalence; primary concern
Cancer
Primary cause of death; primary concern
Skin/coat problems Second most common cause of disease
(26% prevalence); second most common
health concern
*Adapted from DeBowes LJ, Mosier D, Logan EI. Association of
periodontal disease and histologic lesions in multiple organs
from 45 dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 1996; 13: 57-60.
Egenvall A, Bonnet BN, Hedhammar A, et al. Mortality in over
350,000 insured Swedish dogs from 1995-2000: II. Breed-spe-
cific age and survival patterns and relative risk for causes of
death. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica 2005; 46(3): 121-136.
Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, Kirk CA, et al. Health status and popu-
lation characteristics of dogs and cats examined at private vet-
erinary practices in the United States. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 1999; 214: 1336-1341. Morris
Animal Foundation Survey Results, August 12, 2005. Morris
Animal Foundation Survey Results, 1998.
Figure 13-1. Percentage of overweight and obese dogs in intact,
neutered and total female (3,828) and male (4,109) populations.
(Adapted from Edney ATB, Smith PM. Study of obesity in dogs vis-
iting veterinary practices in the United Kingdom. Veterinary Record
1986; 118: 391-396.)
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 253 ---
to obesity (Chapter 27). In addition, daily energy requirement
(DER) differences have been delineated among different
breeds, possibly because of differences in lean body mass, tem-
perament and activity level. As examples, Newfoundland dogs
have energy requirements about 20% less than average (Kienzle
and Rainbird, 1991), whereas Great Danes and Dalmatians
may have energy requirements up to 60% higher than average
(Rainbird and Kienzle, 1990; Kienzle and Rainbird, 1991;
Zentek and Meyer, 1992; Männer, 1990). Careful attention to
specific local lineage and personal clinical impressions of breed
differences may prove useful in food recommendations.
Activity Level
Activity significantly influences the energy requirements of
individual dogs and should be taken into account when esti-
mating energy requirements. For example, standing requires
40% more energy than lying down (Meyer, 1983). DER may
range from RER for sedentary dogs to almost 15 x RER for
endurance athletes under extreme conditions (Hinchcliff et al,
1997). A consistently higher level of physical activity probably
would result in a relative increase in lean body mass, which
would result in an increase in energy use, even at rest (Blaxter,
1989). However, because the activity of individual dogs often
cannot be defined precisely, feeding recommendations should
initially be conservative to avoid overfeeding and the risk of
obesity. Food intake should be adapted as needed to maintain
optimal body weight. Chapter 18 presents more information
about the influence of specific nutrients on athletic perform-
ance (Box 13-1).
SEDENTARY DOGS
Estimations for DER include enough energy to support
spontaneous activity, such as eating, sleeping, going outside and
up to three hours of play and exercise per day. However, most
pet dogs are minimally active (NRC, 2006). Approximately
19% of owners never play with their dogs and 22% take their
259
Feeding Young Adult Dogs
STRESS
Police dogs, sentry dogs and other working dogs may refuse to eat,
lose weight, develop diarrhea or become reluctant to work for inap-
parent reasons. Physiologically induced weight loss is most com-
mon in sentry dogs, in which a combination of mental stress,
weather extremes and activity may result in loss of up to 10% of
body weight during a six-hour tour of duty. Stress stimulates release
of cortisol and induces a discharge of catecholamines. Besides
stimulating alertness, catecholamines may depress food intake in
stressed animals by activating the β-adrenergic and dopaminergic
receptors in the lateral hypothalamus. This is obvious in highly
stressed sentry dogs that may be reluctant to eat the volume of food
they need to meet energy requirements. Dogs in various stressful
situations demonstrate the same behavior. Some show dogs and
racing greyhounds eat sparingly when the owner/handler prepares
to depart to a show or a competition. A decrease in food intake, a
slight increase in energy requirement and the catabolic effect of
cortisol justify feeding a food with increased fat content (at least
about 15% dry matter [DM]) and a protein level of about 25% DM.
This recommendation does not compensate for energy spent for
activity in addition to the stress (e.g., long-distance performances in
which fat must be further increased to meet additional energy
requirements).
Changing environments such as boarding or hospitalization may
influence food intake due to stress. Dogs may develop diarrhea or
refuse to eat when boarded. Practitioners commonly see dogs that
refuse to eat in the hospital, but readily eat at home.
EFFECTS OF THE SHOW CIRCUIT
The success of a show dog is determined by genetics, general
health, socialization, training and nutrition. Therefore, the prepara-
tion of a show dog starts with the correct choice of parents, sound
breeding practices and correct rearing of puppies. Good nutrition
allows for optimal expression of inherited qualities of a dog.
Nutrition of a show dog involves feeding for correct development of
skeleton and dentition, and maintenance of long-term health. More
specific to show dogs are the nutritional needs for optimal condition
of skin and coat, and the support of stress.
Preparation for the show may require particular attention. Skin
health and correct color, length and glossiness of hair are important
for adult show dogs. The first requirement for a shiny coat is good
overall health and nutrition throughout the year. See Chapter 32 for
more information about the nutritional effects on skin and coat.
Some show dogs may be finicky eaters, so they may need to be
fed a more concentrated, palatable food, containing 25 to 30% DM
protein and ≥15% DM fat. During a show, dogs don’t spend much
energy for physical activity; the primary increase is probably due to
stress. Generally, a food that supports the health of skin and coat
will provide all the nutrients needed to counteract stress.
EFFECTS OF MULTI-DOG HOUSEHOLDS
Individually housed dogs with limited exercise may have daily ener-
gy requirements (DER) as low as 90 to 95 kcal (375 to 400 kJ)
metabolizable energy (ME)/BWkg
0.75, or 1.3 x resting energy require-
ment (RER). When housed in kennels with other dogs in situations
where much mutual interaction occurs, DER may increase to 130 to
140 kcal (545 to 585 kJ) ME/BWkg
0.75, or 1.9 to 2.0 x RER or more.
In the U.S., more than a third of dog-owning families have more
than one dog and many families own more than one species. Some
dogs may increase their interest in food when a new pet is intro-
duced to a household, whereas others may refuse to eat for a day
or two. Jealousy may arise over food, bones or toys, or over space
in the bed. Dogs may defend their food bowl and raise the hair on
their crest, withers and back or growl. Free-choice feeding may
have a quieting effect in kennels or multiple-dog households, and
less dominant dogs may have a better chance to get their share of
the food provided. In some cases, dogs need to be fed in separate
places. However, those situations are often created by the owner’s
intervention in the pecking order.
The Bibliography for Box 13-1 can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
Box 13-1. Special Nutritional Considerations for Stressed Dogs.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 254 ---
dogs out for exercise fewer than three hours per week (Slater et
al, 1995). Solitary dogs are less active than dogs housed as a
group (Hubrecht et al, 1992). In one study, large dogs
(Labrador retrievers) were active for half as many hours per day
as small dogs (Manchester terriers) (Patil and Bisby, 2002). An
association was also reported between increasing age and
declining activity; older dogs spent less time running and more
time walking (Head et al, 1997; Siwak et al, 2002).
ACTIVE AND SPORTING DOGS
Dogs and horses are often regarded as the elite athletes of
domesticated mammals (Rose and Bloomberg, 1989).
Greyhounds are sprint athletes and can reach average speeds of
56 to 60 km/hour (35 to 37.5 miles/hour) over typical race dis-
tances (Tompkins and Heasman, 1988). Sled dogs are
endurance athletes and can maintain a trot of about 16
km/hour (10 miles/hour) for 10 to 14 hours per day for several
consecutive days (Grandjean and Paragon, 1992). Energy
requirements of dogs performing work between the two
extremes (i.e., sedentary and sled dogs) need to be tailored to
the individual. Chapter 18 describes how to feed active work-
ing and sporting dogs.
Age
Age-related changes occur between the onset of adulthood and
five to seven years of age.The prevalence of dental disease, obe-
sity, cancer, arthritis and kidney disease generally increases over
this time span (Chapters 27, 30, 34, 37, 47). The cumulative
effects of oxidative damage can result in beta-amyloid deposi-
tion in the brain as early as five to seven years of age, predispos-
ing to cognitive dysfunction (Chapter 35). Furthermore, apart
from reproduction and imposed activity during work or sport,
age may be the single most important factor that influences the
DER of most adult dogs (Table 13-2) (Finke, 1994).
Environment
The influence of the environment should not be neglected when
evaluating energy and nutrient requirements. Temperature,
humidity, type of housing, level of stress and the degree of
acclimatization should be considered with respect to breed and
lifestage nutrient requirements of dogs (Box 13-1). Animal fac-
tors including insulative characteristics of skin and coat (i.e.,
subcutaneous fat, hair length and coat density) and differences
in stature, behavior and activity interact and affect DER.
Dogs can tolerate extreme cold. Adult dogs can maintain
normal body temperature in ambient temperatures as low as -
46 to -50ºC (-51 to -58ºF) for four to 27 hours and six out of
seven dogs maintained normal body temperatures at -75 to -
79ºC (-103 to -110ºF) for three to five hours (Hume and
Egdahl, 1959). One study found that an ambient temperature
of -160ºC (-256ºF) was necessary to make a dog hypothermic
after one hour (Giaja, 1938). When kept outside in cold
weather, dogs may need 10 to 90% more energy than during
optimal weather conditions (Meyer, 1983; Durrer and
Hannon, 1962). Heat losses are minimal at a temperature
called the lower critical temperature (Blaxter, 1989a). This is
the environmental temperature at which dogs reach their
minimum metabolic rate. It is breed specific and is lower
when the thermic insulation (i.e., coat density and length) is
greater (Zentek and Meyer, 1992; Meyer, 1983, 1990;
Männer, 1991; Kleiber, 1975). The lower critical temperature
is estimated at 15 to 20ºC (59 to 68ºF) for longhaired breeds,
20 to 25ºC (68 to 77ºF) for shorthaired breeds and may be as
low as 10 to 15ºC (50 to 59ºF) for arctic breeds (Männer,
1990, 1991; Kleiber, 1975; Meyer, 1990).
Energy use by dogs in cold environments is similar to ener-
gy use during endurance exercise (Minaire et al, 1973). In
part, skeletal muscle is involved in shivering and non-shiver-
ing thermogenesis (NRC, 2006). As with endurance exercise,
muscle glycogen stores may limit the ability to withstand cold
(Minaire et al, 1973). Thus, high-fat foods are probably well
suited for cold-acclimatized dogs in a cold environment. No
published studies currently exist about the influence of chang-
ing the relative proportions of the nutrient composition of a
food for improved resistance to cold in dogs. But for long-
term exposure to cold, the amount of food fed should be
increased to ensure increased energy availability.
Compared to cold ambient temperatures, a relatively small-
er amount of energy is expended to dissipate heat at temper-
atures above the thermoneutral zone; however, increased
amounts of water are required (Box 13-2). Adult dogs toler-
ated high ambient temperatures up to 56ºC (133ºF) for three
hours or more in dry air (Adolph, 1947) but became poikilo-
thermic at 33ºC (91ºF) or higher in moist air after one hour
(Lozinsky, 1924). The metabolic rate increased by 10% in
adult dogs when ambient temperatures were 35ºC (95ºF)
(Minaire et al, 1973).
Housing conditions may influence energy and water
requirements by modifying the immediate environment.
Many housing options are possible; however, any shelter with
temperatures closer to the thermoneutral zone will decrease
energy requirements in cold environments and water require-
ments in hot environments (i.e., protection from wind chill,
excess sun, etc.). Conversely, housing that moves dogs farther
away from the thermoneutral zone will have the opposite
effects (e.g., closed spaces in hot humid conditions, damp
shady shelters in cold weather).The number of dogs in a shel-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
260
Table 13-2. Influence of age on daily energy requirements of
active pet dogs.*
Age
Typical DER ranges**
(years)
kcal ME/BWkg
0.75
kJ ME/BWkg
0.75
x RER
1-2
120-140
500-585
1.7-2.0
3-7
100-130
420-550
1.4-1.9
>7
80-120
335-500
1.1-1.7
Key: DER = daily energy requirement, ME = metabolizable 
energy, RER = resting energy requirement, kcal = kilocalories,
kJ = kilojoules.
*Most pet dogs are minimally active and have a DER of 
approximately 95 kcal/BWkg
0.75 or 1.2 to 1.4 x RER.
**The energy requirements indicated in this table are only 
starting points and should be adapted for individual dogs.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 255 ---
ter may also affect the adequacy of the housing; increased
numbers of dogs will increase the temperature in the local
environment (Blaxter, 1989a; Kleiber, 1975).
Regarding environmental factors, and unrelated to the nutri-
tional needs of dogs, pet food manufacturers develop products
to address owner conveniences and concerns. This practice led
to the development of specific pet food flavor varieties, kibble
shapes, colors and sizes and packaging improvements. In the
U.S., products have been introduced for pets that spend the
majority of their lives indoors or in high population density
urban settings. As an example, these products address the desire
by pet owners for a very small stool volume, which makes
cleanup easier. In addition, pets fed highly digestible, calorical-
ly dense foods eat less,resulting in less food carried home by the
owner. Such trends, however, are not new to urban high popu-
lation density countries such as Japan.
Laboratory and Other Clinical Information
Healthy young adult dogs require few laboratory and other
diagnostic tests as part of routine assessment. The most com-
mon extended database includes a fecal examination for intes-
tinal parasites, tests for heartworm infection and fundic exami-
nation. For dogs older than five years, a urinalysis performed on
a fresh urine specimen collected after an all-night fast is added.
A complete blood count, serum biochemistry profile and uri-
nalysis should be obtained for ill dogs and those with suspect-
ed abnormal nutrition.
Key Nutritional Factors
Table 13-3 summarizes key nutritional factors for young adult
dogs. The following section describes these key nutritional
factors in more detail. Calcium is also a nutrient of concern
for young adult dogs, especially when they are fed homemade
foods (Box 13-3).
261
Feeding Young Adult Dogs
When ambient temperature exceeds a dog’s thermoneutral zone,
water and energy are used for heat loss. The ability of dogs (and
people) to withstand extremely high ambient temperatures is well
demonstrated by a study conducted in 1775 by Blagden. It was
reported that Blagden, and a dog in a basket (to protect its feet from
being burned), entered a room kept at a 126ºC (259ºF) and
remained there for 45 minutes. A steak he took with him was
cooked; however, he and the dog were unaffected.
Bodies cool by radiation, conduction, convection and vaporization
of water. As the ambient temperature increases, the conditions for
heat loss by radiation, conduction and convection become increas-
ingly unfavorable.When the ambient temperature exceeds the dog’s
body temperature, the dog’s entire metabolic heat production and
the heat received from the environment by conduction, convection
and radiation must be removed by evaporation of water to maintain
normal body temperature.
Vaporization of water can occur via insensible perspiration, res-
piration, panting and sweating. Dogs have few sweat glands and
thus must pant to evaporate additional water for cooling. Panting is
facilitated by the elastic properties of the thorax and respiratory sys-
tem. Depending on the size of the dog, the respiratory apparatus
oscillates to a natural frequency (the resonant frequency of the
chest is proportional to the square root of the body mass). The
amount of cooling is regulated by the duration of panting. If not for
resonant elasticity, the increased muscular effort of breathing would
generate more heat than the total heat that could be dissipated by
panting. As a result of these elastic properties, however, panting
requires only a small amount of energy.
The amount of heat lost via vaporization of water is approximate-
ly 580 kcal (2,426 kJ)/kg water. In hot desert-like conditions, in
which the heat gained from the environment can be 10 times the
metabolic heat production, the water required for cooling a 15-kg
dog may equal 2.5% of its body mass per hour. At this rate, if
uncompensated for evaporative water loss, a dog could experience
a 10% reduction of its total body water within 2.5 hours. Thus, from
a nutritional perspective, dogs in hot environments may have a sig-
nificant increase in water requirement with only a small increase in
energy needs to maintain normal body temperature.
The Bibliography for Box 13-2 can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
Box 13-2. Nutrients Used for Body Cooling.
Table 13-3. Key nutritional factors for foods for 
young adult dogs.
Factors
Recommended food levels*
Normal weight
and body 
Inactive/
condition
obese prone
Water
Free access
Free access
Energy density (kcal ME/g)
3.5-4.5
3.0-3.5
Energy density (kJ ME/g)
14.6-18.8
12.5-14.6
Fat and essential fatty acids (%) 
10-20
7-10
Crude fiber (%)**
≤5
≥10
Protein (%)
15-30
15-30
Phosphorus (%)
0.4-0.8
0.4-0.8
Sodium (%)
0.2-0.4
0.2-0.4
Chloride (%)
1.5 x Na
1.5 x Na
Antioxidants (amount/kg food)
Vitamin E (IU)
≥400
≥400
Vitamin C (mg)
≥100
≥100
Selenium (mg)
0.5-1.3
0.5-1.3
Food texture (VOHC Seal of 
Acceptance)
Plaque
Plaque
Key: DM = dry matter, kcal = kilocalories, kJ = kilojoules, ME =
metabolizable energy, VOHC = Veterinary Oral Health Council
Seal of Acceptance (Chapter 47).
*Dry matter basis. Concentrations presume an energy density
of 4.0 kcal/g. Levels should be corrected for foods with higher
energy densities.
**Crude fiber measurements underestimate total dietary fiber
levels in food.
VetBooks.ir


