--- PAGE 48 ---
INTRODUCTION
Proper nutrition is among the more important considerations
in health maintenance and key to disease management. A basic
knowledge of nutrients, requirements, availability and conse-
quences of deficiencies or excesses is important to feed dogs
and cats correctly and give advice about feeding.
A nutrient is any food constituent that helps support life.
Numerous essential nutrients have been discovered over the
course of history. Nutrients are essential in that they are
involved in all basic functions of the body including: 1) acting
as structural components, 2) enhancing or participating in
chemical reactions of metabolism, 3) transporting substances
into, throughout or out of the body, 4) maintaining temperature
and 5) supplying energy.
Nutrients are divided into six basic categories (Figure 5-1).
Some nutrients fulfill a number of functions. For example,
water and several minerals are needed for all the functions
described above except supplying energy. Carbohydrates, fats
and proteins may be used for energy but they can also serve as
structural components. Vitamins are involved primarily with
metabolic functions.
Figure 5-2 shows how an individual nutrient can affect the
health of an animal. The minimum dietary requirement has
been established for most nutrients. Clinical signs of deficiency
may result if a food doesn’t provide this nutrient level. Similarly,
the maximum tolerable levels of certain nutrients are known
and toxicity may result if a food exceeds these levels. The area
between deficiency and excess represents the range of safe and
adequate nutrient intake. The extent of this area will change
depending on the individual nutrient and overall composition
of the food. What is less well known is how exposure to mar-
ginal deficiencies and excesses affects an animal over time.
The most common method of determining the nutrient
content of food is the proximate analysis, which provides the
percentage moisture, protein, fat, ash and crude fiber.
Digestible (soluble) carbohydrate or nitrogen-free extract
(NFE) can then be calculated. Figure 5-3 shows how the
determination is conducted. Many commercial laboratories
conduct proximate analyses of foods.
This chapter is organized into five sections: 1) water, 2) ener-
gy, 3) carbohydrates and fiber (including prebiotic fibers, probi-
otics and synbiotics), 4) protein and amino acids and 5) lipids.
Chapter 6 covers vitamins and minerals. The nutrients in this
chapter and those in the next will be covered in the order shown
in Figure 5-1, beginning at the base of the pyramid. Energy, a
non-nutrient, but nonetheless essential for life will be covered
after water.
WATER
Definition and Function
Chemically, water is the combination of hydrogen and oxygen,
which are joined in the ratio of two hydrogen atoms to one oxy-
gen (H2O). Water is vital to life and is considered the most
Chapter
5
Macronutrients
Kathy L. Gross
Ryan M. Yamka 
Christina Khoo
Kim G. Friesen
Dennis E. Jewell 
William D. Schoenherr
Jacques Debraekeleer
Steven C. Zicker
“Nutriment is both food and poison. 
The dosage makes it either poison or remedy.”
T. B. von Hohenheim
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 49 ---
important nutrient. Water performs the following important
functions in animals:
1. Water is the solvent in which substances are dissolved and
transported around the body. A large number of chemical
compounds can be put into aqueous solution.
2. Water is necessary for the chemical reactions that involve
hydrolysis (e.g.,enzymatic digestion of carbohydrates, pro-
teins and fats).
3. Water helps regulate body temperature. Water has a high
specific heat (specific heat = amount of heat necessary to
raise 1 g of water 1ºC. Specific heat of water = 1). Large
changes in heat production can take place within an ani-
mal with very little change in body temperature. This
property also allows for heat to be circulated. Water has a
high latent heat of vaporization.Water helps regulate body
temperature when it is evaporated from the skin and res-
piratory tract. Large amounts of heat are required to evap-
orate small amounts of water; therefore, much heat can be
lost with little loss of water.
4. Water provides shape and resilience to the body.
Significant negative water balance can result in clinical
dehydration. One manifestation of dehydration is loss of
skin elasticity. As a major constituent of body fluids, water
helps lubricate the joints and eyes, provides protective
cushioning for the nervous system and aids in gas
exchange in respiration by keeping the alveoli of the lungs
moist and expanded.
Water is one of the largest constituents of the animal body,
varying from 40 to more than 80% of the total.The percentage
of water in an animal’s body varies with species, condition and
age. Generally, lean body mass contains 70 to 80% water and 20
to 25% protein, whereas adipose tissue contains 10 to 15%
water and 75 to 80% fat. Younger, leaner animal contain more
body water. Conversely, fatter animals have lower body water
content.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
50
Figure 5-1. The six basic nutrients. Carbohydrates, fats and proteins may be used for energy but also serve as structural components.
Figure 5-2. Total biologic dose-response curve. This response
curve spans intakes ranging from deficiency to adequacy to toxicity.
The intakes at which these three phases reside, and the width of
the range between deficiency and toxicity vary widely among nutri-
ents. (Adapted from Underwood EJ, Mertz W. Introduction. In: Mertz
W, ed. Trace Elements in Human and Animal Nutrition, 5th ed. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press Inc, 1987; 1.)
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 50 ---
As animals mature, they require proportionately less water on
a weight basis because they consume less food per unit of body
weight; thus, there is less urinary water loss. In addition, adult
animals have less surface area per unit of body weight resulting
in less evaporation from skin.
Water Quality
Salinity, nitrates and nitrites, toxic organic and inorganic
chemicals and microbial contamination can affect water qual-
ity. Routine measurement of water quality is the concentra-
tion of all constituents dissolved in water, referred to as “total
dissolved solids” (TDS). Salinity (salt content of water) is syn-
onymous with TDS as an indication of the total ionic concen-
tration in fresh water. Water containing less than 5,000 parts
per million (ppm or mg/l) TDS is generally considered
acceptable for consumption, whereas water containing more
than 7,000 ppm is considered unsuitable for livestock or poul-
try (NRC, 1974). Although livestock and poultry TDS values
are assumed to apply to dogs and cats, water containing less
than 500 ppm TDS is considered acceptable for human
drinking water and is a better recommendation for dogs and
cats (US EPA, 1976).
Standard water quality testing (e.g., nitrates, sulfates, bacter-
ial contamination) typically can be addressed through local
public health departments because the source of water con-
sumed by dogs and cats is often the same as that consumed by
people. Serious concerns about water quality (toxic inorganic
chemicals or pesticides) need to be addressed through testing at
commercial analytical laboratories capable of screening water
for pesticide residues and other chemicals.
Mineral Content
Water “hardness,” or the sum of calcium and magnesium salts
in relation to calcium carbonate, has little effect on dog or cat
well being. High levels of magnesium in hard water have been
implicated as a cause of urolithiasis in cats; however, the
amount of magnesium consumed in drinking water is insignif-
icant compared with the amount consumed in food (i.e., usual-
ly a 10,000-fold difference) (Kirk et al, 1995). Cats prone to
urolithiasis may benefit from consumption of distilled water
rather than hard water that has been softened with a sodium
chloride water softener.
Nitrates
Nitrates are widely dispersed in the environment and can be a
health hazard for all animals when significant amounts are
present in drinking water. Although the concentration of
nitrate ions (NO3) commonly found in drinking water is well
tolerated by dogs and cats, nitrite (NO2, the reduced form of
nitrate) is readily absorbed and can be toxic. At toxic levels,
nitrites oxidize iron in hemoglobin to form methemoglobin,
reducing the oxygen-carrying capacity of blood.
Frequently, nitrates in the water supply indicate bacterial
contamination. Bacterial reduction of nitrate to nitrite is pro-
moted as the pH increases in the intestinal tract. Bacteria in
contaminated water sources can convert nitrate to nitrite.The
safe upper limits for nitrate and nitrite determined for live-
stock drinking water are 1,320 ppm and 33 ppm, respectively.
For human drinking water, the safe upper limit is based on the
total amount of nitrogen derived from the combination of
nitrate (30.4% nitrogen) and nitrite (22.6% nitrogen) and is
10 ppm of nitrogen. No safe upper limits have been estab-
lished for dogs or cats. The livestock limits should be used
until studies are conducted to determine the upper limits for
dogs and cats.
51
Macronutrients
Figure 5-3. Proximate analysis of foods. 
*Proteins contain 16 ± 2% nitrogen. Crude protein = nitrogen x 6.25
or nitrogen ÷ 0.16. Protein levels determined by this method will be
erroneously high if the food contains non-protein nitrogen such as
urea or ammonia. 
**Frequently called nitrogen-free extract (NFE). NFE is determined
as the difference between 100% and the amount of everything else
in the food (i.e., 100% – % moisture – % crude protein – % fat – %
crude fiber – % ash.) Any errors in these analyses also will appear
in the NFE value.
Figure 5-4. Electron transport chain and metabolic water produc-
tion. Key: NAD = nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide, NADH = the
reduced form of NAD, Fe = iron, H2O = water, O2 = oxygen, H/H2
= hydrogen, A = metabolite, Fp = flavoprotein.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 51 ---
Bacteria
The accepted criterion for the sanitary quality of water for peo-
ple has been the absence of coliform bacteria. Although all col-
iform bacteria are not pathogens, many possess the potential;
their presence indicates water is able to support infectious bac-
teria or viruses. Results of other qualitative tests made on water
samples can also predict the presence of bacteria. Bacteria pro-
portionally accompany chemical compounds such as nitrites,
nitrates and phosphates. Generally, if levels of these compounds
are high, the bacterial level will also be high.
Water Requirements
Water requirements are related to maintaining water balance.
Body water lost by urination, defecation, evaporation and per-
spiration is replaced by one of two sources: 1) water derived
from metabolism of nutrients and 2) water consumed as a liq-
uid or as a portion of the food.
Oxygen is the final acceptor of hydrogen ions cleaved from
energy-supplying nutrients (carbohydrates, fats and proteins)
during the generation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
(Figure 5-4). This combination of hydrogen and oxygen is
called metabolic water. Metabolic water can account for 5 to
10% of the total water requirement. An average of 13 ml of
water is produced per 100 kilocalories (kcal) of metabolizable
energy (ME) ingested (Anderson, 1982). Oxidation of 1 g of
glucose, fat and protein results in the production of 0.556,
1.071 and 0.396 g of metabolic water, respectively (Schmidt-
Nielsen, 1964).Three to 4 g of water are released per g of glyco-
gen used (Gosolfi, 1983).
Dogs and cats meet most of their water requirement through
water ingested as food or drink. Animals consuming commer-
cial moist foods drink less liquid than those fed dry foods
because of the higher water content of moist foods (>75%
water). This finding may have important diagnostic implica-
tions (Box 5-1). Generally, the daily water requirement of dogs
and cats, expressed in ml/day, is roughly equivalent to the daily
energy requirement (DER) in kcal/day (for dogs 1.6 x resting
energy requirement [RER]; for cats 1.2 x RER) (Harrison et al,
1960; Haskins, 1984). The amount of water consumed by
mature, healthy, nonreproducing dogs and cats at a comfortable
environmental temperature is about 2.5 times the amount of
dry matter (DM) consumed as food.
Domestic cats, descendants of desert animals, normally
form more concentrated urine than dogs.Thus, water require-
ments for cats may be less than that for dogs. The need for
water can be met by supplying clean, fresh water to pets at all
times (Box 5-2).
Factors Affecting Water Requirements
Although the daily water requirements of dogs and cats are well
defined, practical estimates of daily water intake are less clearly
understood. In addition to metabolic needs, animals of all sizes
consume water to meet a variety of needs, including physical
and social. Factors such as body size (surface area), lactation,
ambient temperature, type and amount of food ingested, gen-
eral state of health, stress, water losses through excretion or
evaporation and individual animal differences influence the
absolute requirement for water.
Water Deficiency and Excess
Deficits of more than a few percent of total body water are
incompatible with health, and large water deficits (i.e., 15 to
20% of body weight) lead to death. Water deprivation can lead
to death within days, whereas animals may survive for weeks
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
52
Box 5-1. The Effect of Fasting on Water
Intake: Diagnostic Implications.
Fasting eliminates water available from food, alters the amount
an animal drinks and decreases total water intake. Figure 1
shows the effect of fasting on drinking water intake, water intake
from food and total water intake for dogs previously consuming
moist or dry food. Total water intake decreased dramatically in
both groups; however, the change in the amount consumed as
drinking water was quite different. Figure 1, Panel A shows the
response of dogs previously fed a moist food. Because most
water intake for these dogs previously was from the food, only a
small amount was supplied by drinking water. During fasting,
water supplied by food was no longer available, thus the amount
drunk increased. Figure 1, Panel B shows the response of dogs
previously eating a dry food. Because these dogs obtained little
water from the food, a large amount was supplied from drinking
water. During fasting, less water was needed and the amount of
drinking water consumed decreased.
The influence of the water content of the previous food on the
amount of water consumed as drinking water may become
important diagnostically. An owner who reports that a dog is not
eating but is drinking twice as much water may be describing the
normal response of a dog that has stopped eating a moist food,
rather than a dog that is truly polydipsic. Conversely, dogs that
had been eating dry food may appear to nearly stop drinking dur-
ing periods of anorexia. These effects emphasize the importance
of accurately assessing the food and feeding method.
The Bibliography for Box 5-1 can be found can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
Figure 1. Effect of fasting on the amount of water consumed in
the food and drunk by beagles previously consuming moist or
dry foods.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 52 ---
without food. Under normal circumstances, thirst ensures that
water intake meets or exceeds the requirement. Inadequate
water intake reduces food intake, which reduces production in
dogs and cats (growth, lactation, reproduction and physical
activity). Decreased water intake may result from reduced avail-
ability, water temperature extremes or poor quality. Water
intoxication (over consumption) is extremely rare in normal,
healthy dogs and cats but can be induced in animals offered
water free choice after prolonged dehydration.
ENERGY
Definition
Living organisms need energy to fuel all bodily functions. The
ultimate source of all energy is the sun, which enables plants to
make energy-containing nutrients from carbon dioxide and
water through photosynthesis (Figure 5-5). A key function of
dietary intake is to provide energy. Animals eat plants or other
animals that have eaten plants. Although energy itself is not a
nutrient, fats, carbohydrates and amino acids contain energy in
the form of chemical bonds and are the energy-containing
nutrients in food. Once eaten, these nutrients are digested,
absorbed and transported to body cells where they are used to
generate energy.
Burning nutrients and measuring the amount of released
heat can determine their energy content. The body obtains
energy by oxidizing nutrients to carbon dioxide and water, but
does not use heat for fuel directly, although heat is used for
body temperature regulation. Instead, the body captures nutri-
ent energy in energy-containing compounds through a series of
enzymatic biochemical reactions. The most important energy-
containing compound is ATP.
In nutrition, the joule is the internationally recognized unit
of measure for energy (Kleiber, 1972; Blaxter, 1989). The joule
expresses the DER of an animal by its power needs or watts.
One watt equals one joule per second. In the United States, a
more commonly used energy measure is the calorie, which
expresses energy in terms of heat. A calorie is the amount of
heat required to raise the temperature of 1 g of water from
14.5ºC to 15.5ºC. A kcal is 1,000 calories and a kilojoule (kJ)
is 1,000 joules. Kcal and kJ can be interconverted using the for-
mula 1 kcal = 4.184 kJ.
Function
The biochemical reactions that take place in the body either use
or release energy. Anabolic reactions require energy and, con-
versely, catabolic reactions release energy. ATP and other ener-
gy-trapping compounds pick up part of the energy released
from one process and transfer it to the other process. For exam-
ple, in the oxidation of nutrients (glucose, fatty acids and amino
acids), the chemical reactions in the biochemical pathways of
glycolysis, β-oxidation, deamination, tricarboxylic acid (TCA)
cycle and oxidative phosphorylation simultaneously generate
and consume ATP. However, the net effect of these reactions is
generation of ATP. It has been estimated that the net yields for
ATP are approximately 90, 75 and 55% for fat, carbohydrate
and protein oxidation, respectively (Flatt, 2001). Biochemical
reactions that occur in glycogen synthesis, fatty acid synthesis,
protein synthesis, gluconeogenesis, protein turnover, Cori cycle,
sodium-potassium ion pump, ureagenesis and muscular con-
tractions all require ATP.
In summary, animals use energy for pumping ions, molecu-
lar synthesis and to activate contractile proteins (Figure 5-5).
These three processes essentially describe the total use of ener-
gy by animals. Without energy supplied by food, these reac-
tions would rapidly cease and death would occur.
Importance of Energy in the Diet 
of Dogs and Cats
The energy content of a food ultimately determines the quan-
tity of food that is eaten each day and therefore affects the
amount of all other nutrients that an animal ingests. Animals
should be fed enough food to meet their energy requirements
and the non-energy nutrients in the food should be balanced
relative to energy density to ensure adequate nutrient intake.
Animals eating an energy-dense food consume less of the food
to meet energy needs; therefore, the concentration of other crit-
ical nutrients must be higher to ensure sufficient intake.
Conversely, animals must consume more of a low-energy food
to meet energy needs. Therefore, the concentration of non-
energy nutrients should be lower to avoid excessive intake and
maintain nutrient balance. If the energy density of the food is
too low, food intake may be restricted by the physical limita-
tions of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Such a food is referred
53
Macronutrients
Box 5-2. Measuring Water Intake in 
Dogs and Cats.
Daily water intake in dogs and cats can be measured easily with
common household tools. The following steps should allow pet
owners to obtain a reasonable estimate of daily water intake.
1. Determine daily water intake requirements (in ml) by calcu-
lating the resting energy requirement of the animal and
multiplying by 1.6 for dogs and 1.2 for cats.
2. Using a fluid cup measure (1 cup = 227 ml), measure the
amount of water to offer the animal throughout the day in
a single container.
3. Fill the water bowl with an appropriate amount of water
from the single container throughout the day, ensuring
fresh water is available at all times.
4. Eliminate the animal’s access to other water sources (e.g.,
toilet bowls, sinks, etc.).
5. If more water is needed beyond the calculated amount,
carefully measure more water into the container and
account for the additional amount when making intake cal-
culations.
6. Measure the water remaining at the end of the day (sum of
that remaining in the water bowl and container) and deter-
mine the amount of water consumed by subtracting the
remaining water from the total amount measured during
the day.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 53 ---
to as being “bulk limited.” Low-energy, bulk-limited foods
designed for weight loss can be formulated to provide adequate
intake of non-energy nutrients (Chapter 27).
Energy Metabolism
Digestion, Absorption and Excretion
Digestion and absorption of the energy-supplying nutrients
(protein, carbohydrate and fat) are discussed in other sections of
this chapter. The total amount of potential energy in food is
termed gross energy (GE). Burning the food and measuring
the heat produced in a bomb calorimeter determine GE in
food. Animals are unable to use 100% of the GE in foods
because some of the food energy is lost in the form of solid, liq-
uid and gaseous excretions as well as radiant heat.
Nutritionists have partitioned dietary energy based on the
losses that occur (Figure 5-6). Digestible energy (DE) refers
to the GE content of food minus energy lost in feces (FE).
Typically, ME is defined as DE minus energy lost in urine
and as intestinal gaseous products of digestion (i.e., eructation
and flatulence). However, because methane production is
considered to be negligible in dogs and cats (McKay and
Eastwood, 1984), ME can be defined in terms of DE and uri-
nary energy losses.
Animals continuously produce heat as a result of basal
metabolism and physical work. Heat production increases after
a meal. This increase in heat due to food ingestion is called the
heat increment of food (HI). HI consists of the heat of intes-
tinal microbial fermentation and heat produced in intermediary
metabolism as a result of using nutrients. A study in people
showed that 5 to 10% of the energy consumed was lost as heat.
The HI during the postprandial period was 60% greater for the
protein-consuming group when compared to the isocaloric car-
bohydrate-consuming group. This increase in HI was attrib-
uted to the increased protein turnover observed by the protein-
consuming group. The metabolic cost for protein turnover was
approximately 36 and 68% for carbohydrate and protein feed-
ing, respectively (Robinson et al, 2000). The energy of HI is
normally wasted except when the environmental temperature is
below an animal’s critical temperature (i.e., shivering). In this
situation, the HI is used to keep the body warm.
Subtracting HI from the ME gives the net energy (NE) of
food. NE can also be partitioned into the amount used for
maintenance (NEm) and the amount used for production
(NEp: growth, pregnancy, lactation, exercise). NE values of
foods and ingredients are typically used when discussing live-
stock nutrition (beef cattle, dairy cattle, swine), whereas DE
and ME are more typically used in canine and feline nutrition.
Although not commonly measured and used, the NE princi-
ples of partitioning energy for maintenance and production
separately hold true for dogs and cats.
Energy Use
The initial biochemical reactions by which energy is derived
from carbohydrates, fats and amino acids are different.
However, all three nutrients eventually go through a final
common pathway for energy generation (i.e., TCA cycle).
Glucose derived from dietary carbohydrates is first oxidized
through the glycolysis pathway to yield pyruvate and then
acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA is oxidized in the TCA cycle pro-
ducing carbon dioxide, and electrons, which are captured by
important heme-containing compounds called cytochromes
(Figure 5-7). Electrons produced in the TCA cycle are shut-
tled by nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and flavin
adenine dinucleotide (FAD) to the electron transport chain
where the cytochromes participate in electron transfer through
valence changes in their heme iron (Figure 5-4). NAD and
FAD are synthesized from the vitamins niacin and riboflavin,
respectively. The electrons are passed between successive oxi-
dation/reduction reactions to the end of the chain where oxy-
gen accepts the final electrons and is converted to water. ATP
is formed as the electrons are passed down the chain (oxidative
phosphorylation). A net of 36 ATP is generated for each mol-
ecule of glucose that is oxidized to carbon dioxide and water.
Fatty acids and glycerol from dietary fats are initially oxidized
to acetyl-CoA by the β-oxidation pathway (Figure 5-8).
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
54
Figure 5-5. Schematic of how animals obtain and use energy.
Plants use solar energy to produce energy-containing nutrients
(i.e., proteins, fats and carbohydrates) via photosynthesis. Animals
eat the energy-containing plant nutrients and other animals. Once
eaten, energy-containing nutrients are digested, absorbed and
metabolized by body cells to release energy that fuels the process-
es that sustain life.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 54 ---
Acetyl-CoA is then oxidized in the TCA cycle and ATP is
generated via oxidative phosphorylation in the electron trans-
port chain. The number of ATP generated from fatty acid oxi-
dation depends on the length of the carbon chain and degree of
unsaturation. For example, myristic acid (C14:0) yields 112
ATP, palmitic acid (C16:0) 129 ATP, palmitoleic acid (C16:1)
127 ATP, stearic acid (C18:0) 146 ATP and oleic acid (C18:1)
144 ATP.
Amino acids obtained from the diet and generated by
endogenous protein breakdown are (re)used for protein syn-
thesis or oxidized as an energy source. Protein synthesis
requires a substantial expenditure of energy. When amino
acids are oxidized, there are additional energy costs associated
with gluconeogenesis and ureagenesis (Flatt, 2001). As a
result the efficiency to derive energy from protein is consider-
ably less than that from fat or carbohydrate. The amino acids
used for energy are deaminated or transaminated to yield a
carbohydrate moiety and ammonia; the ammonia is then con-
verted to urea. The carbon skeleton enters the TCA cycle and
ATP is formed in the electron transport chain. The number
of ATP generated from oxidation of amino acids to water,
carbon dioxide and urea varies, but ranges from six ATP from
glycine to 42 ATP from tryptophan.
Energy Storage
ATP is the usable form of energy for body cells, but not a good
energy storage molecule because it is used quickly after forma-
tion. Glycogen and triglycerides are better storage forms of
energy. Production and use of ATP are equally balanced
through a series of control mechanisms that monitor the
amount of ATP available. After a meal containing adequate
energy, the total body metabolism is generally anabolic; the
body uses energy for synthetic reactions and tissue accretion
(e.g., growth, reproduction). After the body has enough energy
to meet demands, the pathways of glycolysis, β-oxidation,
transamination, deamination and the TCA cycle are slowed.
The pathways of glycogen and fat synthesis are simultaneously
accelerated and excess dietary energy is stored as glycogen and
body fat.These energy stores can then be used to generate ATP
later when needed.Generally,in fasting animals,when the body
needs energy, it uses glycogen first, fat stores second and final-
ly, as a last resort, amino acids from body protein (Chapter 25).
In fed animals, food energy is primarily used for meeting body
energy needs, thus preserving body tissues by preventing catab-
olism. Further discussions of use and control of body energy
stores during exercise can be found in Chapter 18.
Differences in the amount of energy consumed and that
expended by the body can clearly result in changes in body
weight, growth rate and body composition (especially body fat).
Excess energy intake and storage relative to energy expenditure
is a common problem in pet dogs and cats (e.g., obesity). Obese
pets are at increased risk for developing a variety of health prob-
lems (Chapter 27). Excess energy intake in growing large- and
giant-breed puppies may be related to developmental skeletal
abnormalities (Chapter 33). Conversely, inadequate energy
intake relative to expenditure may occur in animals with cancer
and heart disease and resulting in cachexia (Chapters 30 and
36) and in vigorously exercising dogs such as sled dogs
(Chapter 18).
Energy Analyses
The most accurate determination of the DE or ME content of
food (Figure 5-6) is obtained through feeding studies (Yamka
et al, 2007; McDonald et al, 1995; AAFCO, 2007). ME deter-
minations involve the direct measurement of energy intake and
energy lost in feces and urine obtained from digestion or
metabolism studies.Energy lost as expired gases (e.g.,methane)
is negligible (McKay and Eastwood, 1984). As a result, energy
lost as gases is typically ignored when calculating ME for dogs
and cats. The Association of American Feed Control Officials
(AAFCO) has published accepted protocols for the determina-
tion of ME of dogs and cat foods (2007) (Box 5-3). Because of
the laborious nature of determining the actual ME content of
dog foods, calculated ME values are used extensively for diet
formulation and food labeling (Yamka et al, 2007).
Currently, AAFCO (2007) and the National Research
Council (2003) recommend a predictive equation largely based
on fixed energy values and digestibility coefficients for dietary
components (i.e., crude protein, crude fat and carbohydrate) for
estimating the ME content of dog foods. Although this predic-
55
Macronutrients
Figure 5-6. Schematic of how total gross energy of a food is partitioned into digestible energy, metabolizable energy and net energy. Net
energy can be further partitioned into energy used for maintenance (NEm) and production (NEp).
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 55 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
56
Figure 5-7. Biochemical pathways of glycogenesis, glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 56 ---
tive equation reasonably provides precision for foods containing
traditional ingredients, it may be inadequate for currently avail-
able commercial foods due in part to the use of new food addi-
tives/agents and diverse ingredients (Yamka et al, 2007). These
methods for calculating ME can be applied to cat and dog
foods and assume an average apparent digestibility of 80% for
protein, 90% for crude fat and 84% for carbohydrate. The
digestion coefficients are then multiplied by energy values of
4.4, 9.4 and 4.15 kcal/g for protein, fat and carbohydrate,
respectively. The resulting values of 3.5, 8.5 and 3.5 kcal/g are
reasonable estimates of the ME derived from protein, fat and
carbohydrate in typical commercial pet foods, which range in
digestibility from 75 to 85%.The method assumes no energy is
derived from crude fiber, water or ash. This method overesti-
mates the ME content of foods high in fiber or ash or foods
with very low protein, fat and carbohydrate digestibility. This
overestimation inadequately predicts ME for growth, lactation
or trauma recovery in dogs. Likewise, the equation underesti-
mates the ME content of highly digestible and low-fiber foods.
Underestimation of the ME content could result in obesity and
obesity related disorders (e.g, diabetes mellitus and arthritis)
simply because the pet owner is following recommended feed-
ing instructions for what he or she believes to be a lower calo-
rie food (Yamka et al, 2007). Because of the inconsistency of
the Atwater equation to predict ME, many researchers have
attempted to identify better and more accurate methods for
predicting the energy content of pet foods.
Recent research has focused on the fiber portion of the food
to find a more accurate method for determining ME (Earle et
al, 1998; Kienzle, 2002). This method increases ME predic-
tion; however, the crude fiber content of most commercial dog
foods accounts for approximately 3 to 5% of the food.
Therefore, it becomes practical to focus on other components
of the food, such as crude protein (20 to 30% of the dietary
DM) or carbohydrate (20 to 50% of the dietary DM), which
would contribute more to total energy content and, thus, may
have a greater impact on the prediction of ME (Yamka et al,
2007). The crude protein fraction represents numerous com-
pounds that can broadly be classified as amino acid (TAA)
and non-amino acid (NAA: e.g., nucleic acids, amines,
amides, etc.) compounds (Yamka et al, 2007). Digestibility
(Giesecke et al, 1982; Yamka et al, 2005) and relative contri-
bution to urinary nitrogen energy losses (Blaxter, 1989) differ
among these compounds. Nucleic acids have low digestibility
(approximately 57%) in dogs (Giesecke et al, 1982).
Numerous studies have demonstrated that amino acids have
high digestibility. (See Protein section.) With this knowledge,
it becomes important to identify protein quality to further
characterize crude protein. The NAA portion of crude pro-
tein has a negative impact on ME whereas the TAA influ-
ences ME directly (Yamka et al, 2007). As a result of defining
protein composition (TAA:NAA), predicting ME has great-
ly improved for dry dog foods.
Estimation of the NE of a food requires measurement of the
heat lost. Heat production can be measured directly using an
animal calorimeter (direct calorimetry) or estimated indirectly
from the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide (indirect or
respiratory calorimetry) (Kleiber, 1972; Blaxter, 1989) (Box 5-
4). Partitioning NE into NEm and NEp involves estimating
the energy retained by the animal and will be discussed below.
Energy Requirements
Knowledge of energy requirements is needed to determine how
much food to feed to an animal. Determining energy require-
ments involves measuring energy expenditure of an animal
under a defined set of physiologic and environmental condi-
tions. Energy expenditure studies typically involve carefully
accounting for all components of the energy budget of an ani-
57
Macronutrients
Figure 5-8. This diagram depicts metabolism of long-chain fatty
acids for energy production. Entry of long-chain fatty acids into
mitochondria is facilitated by carnitine-acyl transferase enzymes.
Medium-chain and short-chain fatty acids bypass this important
regulatory step and enter the mitochondria unaided. β-oxidation is
an energy-yielding catabolic process involving fatty acids that
occurs within the mitochondrial matrix. The resultant products are
acetyl-CoA, which enters the TCA cycle for further metabolism (to
CO2, water and ATP) and reduced coenzymes (NADH/FADH2) for
ATP production by oxidative phosphorylation.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 57 ---
mal including: 1) energy consumed in food, 2) energy losses
from the body via urine, feces and intestinal gases, 3) heat pro-
duced by metabolism and/or physical work, 4) retention of
energy as tissue accretion and 5) secretion of energy as milk
(Blaxter, 1989). Because the first law of thermodynamics states
that energy is conserved, energy intake by the animal minus all
energy lost must equal the energy retained or secreted as shown
by the following equation:
RE = GE – FE – UE – GPD – HP
(Where GE = gross energy intake, FE = fecal energy excreted,
UE = urine energy excreted, GPD = gaseous products of diges-
tion, HP = heat production and RE = retained energy primari-
ly in the form of lean and fat tissues or energy secreted in milk).
The above equation can be simplified to three terms by substi-
tuting ME for the GE – FE – UE – GPD portion of the equa-
tion. The simplified energy budget equation is now:
RE = ME – HP
Heat production is the sum of heat lost through radiation,
convection, conduction and evaporation and heat stored in the
body as exemplified by an increase in body temperature. Heat
is lost when food is metabolized and when physical work is per-
formed. When no food is given, no physical work is done and
an animal is in a thermoneutral environment, heat production
results from basal cellular metabolism. In this case, the term
basal energy expenditure (BEE) can be used as an alternative to
heat production. Thus, when heat production is measured,
energy expenditure is measured, and then energy expenditure is
equated with energy requirements. Also, if energy retention is
zero, then an animal is in energy equilibrium where heat pro-
duction equals ME. In this case, ME equals NEm. The third
term can be derived if two of the three terms of the energy
budget equation are known. Alternatively, if all three compo-
nents are measured then there is added confidence in the ener-
gy requirement estimate.
Laboratory protocols and specialized equipment have been
developed to measure the three major components of the
energy budget. ME determinations have been discussed pre-
viously. Box 5-4 provides information about whole animal
calorimetry used to estimate HI. The primary forms of RE in
animals are protein and fat, although a small and relatively
constant proportion of carbohydrate is stored as glycogen.
The gold standard method for measuring RE in farm animals
is the comparative slaughter method in which the energy con-
tent of an animal is determined by bomb calorimetry on
ground carcass samples (McDonald et al, 1995). Other meth-
ods have been developed that are noninvasive, less costly and
allow for repeat measurements on the same subject.
Underwater weighing, bioelectrical impedance, anthropomet-
ric measurements (triceps skin-fold thickness, upper arm
muscle area and body mass index), stable isotopes, zoometric
measurements, ultrasound and dual energy x-ray absorptiom-
etry [DEXA]) are commonly used to estimate body composi-
tions (fat and lean proportions) of people and other animals.
Some of these methods have been further adapted for use in
dogs and cats. Two-dimensional ultrasound technology has
been used successfully for estimating back fat and total body
fat to determine obesity in dogs (Morooka et al, 2001;
Wilkinson and McEwan, 1991; Anderson and Corbin, 1982).
In recent years, DEXA technology has been used to provide
rapid and repeatable estimates of body composition of dogs
and cats (Wedekind et al, 1992; Toll et al, 1994).
For animals under maintenance conditions, when no tissue
is accreted or milk secreted, the RE component of the energy
balance equation is theoretically zero; therefore, the HI is the
estimate of the energy expended for maintenance of adult ani-
mals. In growing, pregnant and lactating animals, the RE por-
tion of the energy budget is not zero; therefore, both the RE
and HI should be measured to accurately predict the energy
requirements for animals undergoing these production
parameters.
Energy requirements have been given different names
depending on the physiologic and environmental conditions
under which the measurements were made (Table 5-1). Basal
energy requirement (BER) represents energy needs for a nor-
mal, awake, fasting, resting animal in a thermoneutral envi-
ronment. For dogs and cats, fasting overnight or for 12 hours
is usually considered adequate. BER includes the energy
needed to maintain cellular activity, respiration and circula-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
58
Box 5-3. AAFCO Protocol for Determining
Metabolizable Energy of Dog and Cat
Foods.
Animal feeding studies are the most desirable means for meas-
uring the metabolizable energy (ME) of a food. The following
steps summarize what is involved when investigators conduct
a ME study using dogs or cats, according to protocols estab-
lished by the Association of American Feed Control Officials
(AAFCO).
1. Feed a group of animals a known amount of food each
day for a given number of days (typically five to seven days
for dogs and between five and 15 days for cats).
2. Collect and record the weight of feces excreted on the
same days as food measurements were made.
3. Analyze the gross energy (GE) content of samples of the
food and feces (FE) by bomb calorimetry. Bomb calorime-
try involves placing a known amount of the food or feces
into a bomb compartment submerged in a water bath.
Oxygen is added to the compartment and ignited with an
electrical spark and the increase in water temperature
that surrounds the bomb is measured as the sample
burns. Urinary energy (UE) can be measured directly by
collecting urine and then determining the GE of the urine.
Alternatively, measuring protein digestibility and then
using a factor that predicts the energy content of the urine
can estimate UE. Energy from intestinal gases is typically
ignored because it constitutes a very small proportion of
energy lost in dogs and cats.
4. ME of the food is then calculated as GE minus FE and UE.
The Bibliography for Box 5-3 can be found can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 58 ---
tion. BER is determined by measuring the energy expenditure
under the stated conditions. Thus, the terms BER and BEE
are synonymous.
RER represents the energy requirement for a normal animal
at rest under thermoneutral but not fasted conditions (Blaxter,
1989).The amount of time between a meal and when measure-
ments are made can affect the estimate of RER; therefore, they
should be standardized between animals and experiments.
RER also differs from BER because it includes energy expend-
ed for recovery from physical activity. Depending on the level
of activity and time between cessation of activity and the ener-
gy expenditure determination, RER may range from almost the
same value as BER to as much as 25% higher (Kleiber, 1961).
Therefore, the differences between BER and RER include
59
Macronutrients
Calorimetry is the measurement of heat. Calorimetry has been
used to understand how the body metabolizes food energy for hun-
dreds of years.The discovery by Lavoiser and LaPlace in 1783 that
heat produced by animals was related to oxygen consumption and
carbon dioxide formation and was analogous to burning of a can-
dle was revolutionary and signaled the beginning of the study of
energy use by calorimetry. Because animals do not store heat, the
quantity of heat lost from the animal is equal to the quantity pro-
duced. Calorimetry allows measurement of the heat lost (heat pro-
duction, [HP]).
HP is one of the terms in the energy balance equation: HP = ME
– RE. Because HP has been equated with energy expenditure and
energy requirements, the measurement of heat really means
measurement of energy requirements. HP can be measured
directly (direct calorimetry) or estimated from respiratory exchange
(indirect or respiratory calorimetry).
DIRECT CALORIMETRY
With direct calorimetry, an animal is placed in an airtight, insulat-
ed chamber. The heat lost from the body includes that lost by
radiation, conduction and convection and by evaporation of water
from skin and respiratory surfaces (e.g., lungs). The heat pro-
duced by the animal is measured as the difference in tempera-
ture between inside and outside of the chamber over time.
There are several different designs for chambers and ways to
measure heat that give rise to various methods of determining HP
directly. Most direct calorimetry systems are relatively expensive to
construct and operate, somewhat complex to operate, require con-
finement of the subjects, but are very accurate and reliable.
Direct calorimetry is suited to energy expenditure measure-
ments for research purposes and, in the clinical setting, for well
patients and moderately sick patients. Direct calorimetry with an
enclosed chamber is not feasible for very sick patients that are
attached to ventilators or those requiring constant supervision and
intervention.
INDIRECT CALORIMETRY
Indirect calorimetry involves calculation of HP by measuring respi-
ratory exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. Food carbohydrates
and fats are oxidized by the body to yield heat, water and carbon
dioxide as shown in these example equations.
Glucose (C6H12O6) + 6O2 →6CO2 + 6H2O + heat (2.82MJ)
Triglyceride tripalmitin C3H5O3(C16H31)3 + 74O2 →
51CO2 + 49H2O + heat (32.02MJ)
The amount of heat generated from the consumption of one liter
of oxygen is exactly known if only glucose or a single fat is oxi-
dized, as well as for mixtures of the two.These thermal equivalents
of oxygen are used to estimate HP from oxygen consumption.
Protein is incompletely oxidized because the body cannot use
nitrogen. Animals typically do not obtain energy exclusively from
carbohydrate, fat or protein; rather, they oxidize mixtures. Because
the ratio of the volume of carbon dioxide produced for each volume
of oxygen used is different for carbohydrate, fat and protein, this
ratio, known as the respiratory quotient (RQ) can be used to deter-
mine the proportions of each nutrient oxidized. The RQ is 1
(6CO2/6O2) for carbohydrate, 0.7 (51CO2/72.5O2) for fat, and
0.8 for protein. Some food energy is metabolized to hydrogen and
methane by gut microflora.
The apparatus used to measure the respiratory exchange is
called a respiratory chamber. As with direct calorimetry, there are
several different methods for constructing chambers and measur-
ing gas flow (oxygen and carbon dioxide) into and out of the cham-
ber. Indirect calorimetry chambers typically are less complex and
less costly to construct and maintain compared with direct
calorimetry chambers. Energy expenditure calculated from indirect
calorimetry measurements can be just as reliable and accurate as
direct measures.
Oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange can be measured with a
simple hood, canopy or expiratory collection device instead of a
chamber. These systems are portable and are easier to use in clin-
ical situations and in animals and people as they perform their
daily activities. These more portable systems may not be as accu-
rate as the chamber systems, but are less costly and highly flexi-
ble. Energy expenditure can be measured in very sick patients
using a hood system when other methods are unsuitable.
Knowledge of energy use is important to make accurate esti-
mates of energy requirements to optimize the health of animals.
Energy requirements vary with nutritional, genetic and environ-
mental influences; interactions among the factors are complex.
Therefore, it is easiest to isolate and measure the specific factors
that alter energy expenditure (e.g., resting energy expenditure,
thermic effect of food, breed, age, gender, energy expenditure due
to growth, pregnancy, lactation and work) and then develop predic-
tion equations for total energy requirements of the animal, taking
into account all the relevant factors. Although both methods of
calorimetry, direct and indirect, have technical challenges, each
technique is useful in research and clinical practice. Calorimetry is
important to build an understanding of factors that influence ener-
gy requirements.
The Bibliography for Box 5-4 can be found can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
Box 5-4. Calorimetry.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 59 ---
energy needed for: 1) digestion, absorption and metabolism of
food (heat increment) and 2) recovery from previous physical
activity. An animal in a maintenance state has no net change in
body composition; it produces no products and does not per-
form work.
Maintenance energy requirement (MER) is the energy
required to keep an animal in a maintenance state. MER
includes energy needed for: 1) basal metabolism, 2) obtaining,
digesting and absorbing food in amounts to maintain body
composition and 3) spontaneous voluntary activity (standing
up, lying down, moving about to eat, drink and void feces and
urine). MER does not include energy needed to support addi-
tional physical activity (e.g., exercise or work) and production
(e.g., gestation, lactation, growth).
DER represents the average daily energy requirement of any
animal. DER depends on lifestage and activity. It differs from
MER in that it includes activity necessary for work, gestation,
lactation or growth. DER equals RER plus energy needed for
physical activity and production. DER will be used through-
out this text because it offers a practical and immediately
usable energy requirement value for veterinarians and their
health care teams. Table 5-2 summarizes energy requirements
for cats and dogs.
Daily Energy Requirements
Measuring the energy expenditure of an individual animal is
impractical for practicing veterinarians and pet owners.
Therefore, researchers have developed prediction equations
that may be used to estimate DER. Most of the equations pre-
dict RER based on the easily measured parameter of body
weight. After the RER is estimated, one can calculate DER by
multiplying RER by an appropriate factor.The DER for grow-
ing, pregnant, lactating and exercising animals includes energy
needed for maintenance plus the additional energy for work
and production, thus different multiplication factors are used
for each situation (Table 5-2). Similarly, deviations from the
RER due to breed, gender, neuter status, presence of disease
and environmental conditions can be included in the multipli-
cation factor to improve the accuracy of predicting the DER for
an individual animal. In routine veterinary practice, these ener-
gy requirement equations should be used as guidelines, starting
points or estimates of energy requirements for individual ani-
mals and not as absolute requirements.
SIZE
It was known as early as the eighteenth century that large
animals produced more heat than small animals. Research in
the nineteenth century, however, showed that small animals
produced more heat per unit of body weight (body surface area)
than large animals (Blaxter, 1989; Kleiber, 1961; Schmidt-
Neilsen, 1984). Body surface area became the standard means
of expressing energy metabolism within a species and makes
sense because rate of heat loss from a body to the environment
is proportional to the area of its surface.
Although use of body surface area makes sense, it is not eas-
ily determined in animals. Equations to predict body surface
area from body weight were developed (BWkg)0.67; however,
because of different body shapes, calculated surface area did
not vary with body weight to the 0.67 power in some animals
(e.g., compare a Labrador retriever weighing 30 kg with an
Irish setter of the same weight, or a French bulldog with a
whippet) (Blaxter, 1989). In the early 1930s, Kleiber and
Brody ignored the concept of body surface area and through
numerous animal experiments showed that energy require-
ments for a variety of different species are more closely repre-
sented as metabolic rate (kcal/day) = 73.3(BWkg)0.74 or
70.5(BWkg)0.734. In an effort to simplify calculations,
researchers have proposed and used modifications of Kleiber-
Brody equations using different exponents or converting
exponential formulas to linear formulas (Kronfeld, 1991; Hill,
1993; Burger and Johnson, 1991; Earle and Smith, 1991;
Allen and Hand, 1990).
The debate about whether to use an exponential equation
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
60
Table 5-1. Commonly used measurements of energy.
Basal energy requirement (BER): BER represents the energy
requirement for a normal animal in a thermoneutral environ-
ment, awake but resting and in postabsorptive (fasting) state.
Other names: fasting heat production (FHP), basal metabolic
rate (BMR), basal energy expenditure (BEE).
Resting energy requirement (RER): RER represents the
energy requirement for a normal but fed animal at rest in a ther-
moneutral environment. RER differs from BER in that it includes
energy expended for recovery from physical activity and feed-
ing. Therefore, the difference between BER and RER includes
energy needed for digestion, absorption and metabolism of
food (heat increment) and recovery from previous physical
activity. Other names: resting energy expenditure (REE).
Maintenance energy requirement (MER): MER represents
the energy requirement of a moderately active adult animal in a
thermoneutral environment. It includes energy needed for
obtaining, digesting and absorbing food in amounts to maintain
body weight, as well as energy for spontaneous activity. MER
does not include energy needed to support additional activity
(work, gestation, lactation and growth). Other names: mainte-
nance energy expenditure (MEE).
Daily energy requirement (DER): DER represents the average
daily energy expenditure of any animal, dependent on lifestage
and activity. DER differs from MER in that it includes activity
necessary for work, gestation, lactation and growth, as well as
energy needed to maintain normal body temperature.
Heat production (HP): HP is the sum of heat loss through
radiation, convection, conduction and evaporation and heat
stored in the body as exemplified by an increase in body tem-
perature. Heat is lost when food is metabolized (heat incre-
ment) and when physical work is performed.
Heat increment (HI): HI is heat produced from the digestion,
absorption and metabolism of food. Other names: specific
dynamic action (SDA), thermic effect of food, diet-induced ther-
mogenesis.
Gross energy (GE): GE is the total heat produced by burning a
food in a bomb calorimeter.
Digestible energy (DE): DE is the energy remaining after the
energy lost from feces is subtracted from GE.
Metabolizable energy (ME): ME is energy available to the ani-
mal after energy from feces, urine and combustible gases has
been subtracted.
Kilocalorie (kcal): One calorie is the energy needed to raise
the temperature of 1 g of water from 14.5 to 15.5°C. 1 kcal =
1,000 calories = 4.184 kJ.
Kilojoule (kJ): One kilojoule equals 107 ergs, or the energy
expended when 1 kg is moved 1 m by 1 newton. 1 kJ = 0.239
kcal.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 60 ---
61
Macronutrients
Table 5-2. Calculation of energy requirements.
Calculation of daily energy requirement (DER) is based on the resting
energy requirement (RER) for the animal modified by a factor to
account for normal activity or production (e.g., growth, gestation, lac-
tation, work). RER is a function of metabolic body size. RER is calcu-
lated by raising the animal’s body weight in kg to the 0.75 power. The
average RER for mammals is about 70 kcal/day/kg metabolic body
size: RER (kcal/day) = 70(BWkg)0.75 or 30(BWkg) + 70 (if the animal
weighs between 2 and 45 kg). Expressed in kJ, the average RER for
mammals is about 293(BWkg)0.75. These energy requirements should
be used as guidelines, starting points or estimates of energy require-
ments for individual animals and not as absolute requirements. This
table is divided into three parts: 1) Feline DER, 2) Canine DER and 3)
Resting energy requirements of adult dogs in kilocalories metaboliz-
able energy, which may be used instead of the energy equations list-
ed above. RER values from Part 3 still need the DER multiplication
factors for dogs listed in Part 2.
Part 1. Feline 
DER
Maintenance 
(0.8 to 1.6 x RER)
Neutered adult
= 1.2 x RER
Intact adult
= 1.4 x RER
Active adult
= 1.6 x RER
Inactive/obese prone
= 1.0 x RER
Weight loss
= 0.8 x RER
Critical care
= 1.0 x RER
Weight gain
= 1.2-1.4 x RER at ideal weight
Gestation
Energy requirement increases linearly during gestation in cats.
Energy intake should be increased to 1.6 x RER at breeding and
gradually increased through gestation to 2 x RER at parturition.
Free-choice feeding of pregnant queens is also recommended.
Lactation
Lactation is nutritionally demanding and the physiologic and nutrition-
al equivalent of heavy work.
Recommend 2 to 6 x RER (depending on number of kittens nursing)
or free-choice feeding.
The following table may also be used to estimate the DER of lactating
queens:
Weeks of lactation
DER
Weeks 1-2
RER + 30% per kitten
Week 3
RER + 45% per kitten
Week 4
RER + 55% per kitten
Week 5
RER + 65% per kitten
Week 6
RER + 90% per kitten
Growth
Daily energy intake for growing kittens should be about 2.5 x RER.
Free-choice feeding is recommended.
Part 2. Canine 
DER
Maintenance 
(1.0 to 1.8 x RER)
Neutered adult
= 1.6 x RER
Intact adult
= 1.8 x RER
Inactive/obese prone
= 1.4 x RER
Weight loss
= 1.0 x RER
Critical care
= 1.0 x RER
Weight gain
= 1.2-1.4 x RER at ideal weight
Work
Light work
= 2 x RER
Moderate work
= 3 x RER
Heavy work
= 4-8 x RER
Gestation
First 42 days: feed as an intact adult.
Last 21 days: use 3 x RER. (This quantity may need to be increased
to maintain normal body condition for some dogs, especially larger
breeds.)
Lactation
Lactation is nutritionally demanding and the physiologic and nutrition-
al equivalent of heavy work.
Recommend 4 to 8 x RER (depending on number of puppies nursing)
or free-choice feeding.
The following table may also be used to estimate the DER of lactating
bitches:
Puppies (No.)
DER
1
3.0 x RER
2
3.5 x RER
3-4
4.0 x RER
5-6
5.0 x RER
7-8
5.5 x RER
≥9
≥6.0 x RER
Growth
Daily energy intake for growing puppies should be 3 x RER from
weaning until four months of age.
At four months of age energy intake should be reduced to 2 x RER
until the puppy reaches adult size.
Part 3. Resting energy requirements of adult dogs in kilocalo-
ries metabolizable energy*
Body weights
RER 
kg
lb
kcal ME/kg0.75
1
2.2
70
2
4.4
118
3
6.6
160
4
8.8
198
5
11.0
234
6
13.2
268
7
15.4
301
8
17.6
333
9
19.8
364
10
22.0
394
11
24.2
423
12
26.4
451
13
28.6
479
14
30.8
507
15
33.0
534
16
35.2
560
17
37.4
586
18
39.6
612
19
41.8
637
20
44.0
662
21
46.2
687
22
48.4
711
23
50.6
735
24
52.8
759
25
55.0
783
26
57.2
806
27
59.4
829
28
61.6
852
29
63.8
875
30
66.0
897
31
68.2
920
32
70.4
942
33
72.6
964
34
74.8
986
35
77.0
1,007
36
79.2
1,029
37
81.4
1,050
Body weights
RER 
kg
lb
kcal ME/kg0.75
38
83.6
1,071
39
85.8
1,092
40
88.0
1,113
41
90.2
1,134
42
92.4
1,155
43
94.6
1,175
44
96.8
1,196
45
99.0
1,216
46
101.2
1,236
47
103.4
1,257
48
105.6
1,277
49
107.8
1,296
50
110.0
1,316
51
112.2
1,336
52
114.4
1,356
53  
116.6  
1,375
54  
118.8  
1,394
55  
121.0  
1,414
56  
123.2  
1,433
57  
125.4  
1,452
58  
127.6  
1,471
59  
129.8  
1,490
60  
132.0  
1,509
61  
134.2  
1,528
62  
136.4  
1,547
63  
138.6  
1,565
64  
140.8  
1,584
65  
143.0  
1,602
66  
145.2  
1,621
67  
147.4  
1,639
68  
149.6  
1,658
69  
151.8 
1,676
70  
154.0  
1,694
*Use the DER multiplication fac-
tors for dogs listed above for
total energy intake.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 61 ---
based on body surface area or metabolic body size or a linear
formula to predict energy requirements for dogs and cats is
largely academic (Männer et al, 1991; Männer, 1991; Kienzle
and Rainbird, 1991; Finke, 1994; NRC, 2003). Figure 5-9
compares energy requirements calculated using several different
published methods. These equations yield similar estimates,
especially at intermediate weight ranges. To practicing veteri-
narians, the differences in the energy requirement predicted by
using one exponent or another or a linear equation compared to
an exponential equation are small. For example, Figure 5-10
demonstrates results among dogs and cats when the average
energy consumed is set at 100%. In 95% of 120 dogs, the ener-
gy consumed varied from 65 to 135% (range 43 to 152%); in
95% of 76 cats, it varied from 61 to 139% (range 50 to 146%).
Thus, the amount of food needed by dogs and cats for mainte-
nance, even under similar environmental conditions and when
kept in cages or runs, varied threefold. Even when the extremes
are excluded (the top and bottom 2.5%), the amount of energy
needed varied more than twofold.
The following sections discuss differences in energy require-
ments for different physiologic and environmental conditions.
The energy values expressed in this text are based on the expo-
nent (BWkg)0.75 because: 1) there is greater size diversity among
dogs than for other species (e.g., 1 kg for a Chihuahua to 90 kg
or more for a St. Bernard), 2) changes in lean body mass are of
primary interest, 3) this equation works well for other mam-
mals and 4) it can be easily calculated by cubing body weight in
kg and then taking its square root twice.
LIFESTAGE
Adult Maintenance
Estimates of the DER for dogs range between 95 to 200
kcal (397 to 850 kJ) of DE per (BWkg)0.75 per day (NRC,
2006; Durrer and Hannon, 1962; Leibetseder, 1978; Meyer,
1983), which represents a surprisingly wide range. Differences
in activity levels of dogs account for much of this range. Other
factors that contribute to differences in energy requirements
include differences in breed, temperament, skin and coat
insulation, age, social environment and differences in
methodology used to estimate the requirement. For the aver-
age sexually intact healthy adult dog, the DER approximates
1.8 x RER.
Non-obese adult domestic cats vary in body weight from
approximately 2.5 to 6.5 kg, which is a much smaller range of
weight extremes than exists for dogs.The NRC recommends a
DER for adult cats of 70 to 90 kcal/BWkg (290 to 380
kJ/BWkg) (1986). However, Earle and Smith reported that
inactive cats required less energy (39 to 66 kcal/BWkg or 162
to 278 kJ/BWkg) and, similar to what is seen in dogs, they
found that the energy intake per unit body weight was lower in
heavier cats (Earle and Smith, 1991). Generally, the DER for
adult intact cats is about 1.4 x RER. Energy requirements are
lower for neutered animals (discussed below).
Growth
Energy needs for growth are increased above maintenance
because energy is needed to form new tissue. However, growth
is a dynamic process; its rate declines as animals approach
maturity.Therefore, the amount of energy needed also declines
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
62
Figure 5-9. Comparison of three methods for calculating resting
energy requirement (RER).
Figure 5-10. Variation in expected energy intake required to maintain optimal body weight in dogs and cats. Data were collected from 120
dogs and 76 cats kept under similar conditions and fed the amount of a variety of commercial pet foods necessary to maintain body weight.
(Adapted from Lewis LD, Morris ML Jr, Hand MS. Small Animal Clinical Nutrition III. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Associates, 1987; 1–10.)
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 62 ---
during growth. The time taken to reach maturity in dogs
increases with increasing mature body weight. The highest
energy requirement for puppies occurs at weaning. Growing
puppies require 3 x RER from weaning until four months of
age and 2 x RER from four months of age until the puppy
reaches adult size.
Much research has been done in mammals to evaluate how
food energy intake affects the composition of growth (i.e., body
composition, fat vs. lean). Energy consumed during growth
influences the proportion of lean and fat gain during growth.
The metabolic efficiency of converting dietary fat to body fat for
storage is higher than the efficiency of converting dietary carbo-
hydrate or protein to body fat.This finding has been reported to
occur in puppies when comparing the effects of high-fat and
low-fat foods (Romsos et al, 1976). Puppies consuming a high-
fat food had similar growth in lean body mass compared with
that of puppies fed foods lower in fat, but deposited more body
fat (Romsos et al, 1976). The prioritization of growth results in
energy being preferentially used for protein growth and second-
arily for fat gain. Excess energy with resulting obesity has been
incriminated as a factor contributing to degenerative joint dis-
ease (Chapters 27 and 34).Developmental orthopedic disease in
growing large- and giant-breed puppies is a frequently encoun-
tered problem (Chapter 33).
The energy requirements of growing kittens follow a similar
pattern as that for puppies.The highest energy requirement per
unit of body weight occurs at about five weeks of age (Miller
and Allison, 1958). Energy recommendations for growing kit-
tens approximate 2.5 x RER.
Reproduction (Gestation and Lactation)
In dogs, most of the fetal weight gain occurs in the last third
of pregnancy; therefore, the energy requirement of the bitch
does not increase markedly until then. DER during gestation
approximates 3 x RER for most breeds, although larger breeds
may require more energy than this to maintain normal body
condition. In cats, energy intake increases incrementally from
the start of gestation and continues up to parturition
(Loveridge, 1986).
Lactation is one of the most energy-demanding lifestages for
animals. Depending on the size and age of the litter, DER can
increase as much as 6 x RER for cats and 8 x RER for dogs.
Lactation lasts approximately six weeks in dogs and cats. The
energy intakes for dogs and cats during reproduction are sum-
marized in Chapters 15 and 22.
Age
Apart from lactation and imposed activity during work or
sport, age may be the single most important factor influenc-
ing DER of adult pet dogs (Finke, 1994). Three groups of
adult dogs can be distinguished: 1) young (one to two years
old), 2) middle aged (three to seven years old) and 3) older
(more than seven years of age) (Kienzle and Rainbird, 1991;
Finke, 1994; Rainbird and Kienzle, 1990). Older animals typ-
ically need fewer calories to maintain body weight and condi-
tion, primarily because of decreased activity (Meyer, 1983,
1990; Finke, 1991). This effect may also be due to increased
body fat and less lean body mass resulting in reduced RER. In
studies, dogs over seven years of age required 10 to 20% less
energy than those three to seven years of age (Kienzle and
Rainbird, 1991; Finke, 1994; Harper, 1998). It is important to
note that senior dogs derive energy from their diets just as
efficiently as young adult dogs. Because MER declines by
approximately 15 to 20% and energy digestibility remains
constant, senior dogs should be offered foods providing a 15
to 20% caloric reduction (Kienzle and Rainbird, 1991; Finke,
1994; Harper, 1998). However, it is important to realize that
there are exceptions to this rule. For example, physical activi-
ty in a senior dog may offset the age-associated reduction in
MER (Harper, 1998a).
Generally, people assume that senior cats are more likely to
be obese because their physical activity decreases with age. As a
result, it is often suggested that senior cats be fed energy-
restricted foods. One study in cats ranging from one to nine
years showed no apparent correlation between increasing age
and changes in body composition (Munday et al, 1994).
Another investigator found no significant effect of age on ener-
gy requirements of cats (Burger, 1994). Although these data
indicate that energy requirements of cats do not decline with
age as with dogs, the greatest proportion of overweight cats are
older than four and less than 11 years (Armstrong and Lund,
1996; Kronfeld et al, 1994; Scarlett et al, 1994). There appears
to be a reduction in the percentage of obese cats after age 11
and a shift towards cats being underweight. The increase in
numbers of old thin cats could be the result of the early death
of middle-aged obese cats (Harper, 1998a).
Dogs and cats over 11 years of age tend to be thinner and
have less body fat than those between seven and 11 years old.
Similar to that found in people, the lean body mass of dogs and
cats declines with age (Armstrong and Lund, 1996; Harper,
1998a; Jewell et al, 1996). A study investigating the effects of
63
Macronutrients
Table 5-3. Influence of low environmental temperatures on daily
energy requirement (DER).
Increase  
Environmental 
in DER
temperature 
Breed
(%)
Low
Normal
Labrador retrievers
and beagles
25 (12-43)*
8.5°C (47.3°F)
15°C (59°F)
Great Danes
22**
Winter
Summer
Shorthaired dogs
95***
7.6°C (46°F)
25°C (77°F)
Longhaired dogs
59.5***
7.6°C (46°F)
25°C (77°F)
Beagles
70.5†
-17°C (1.4°F)
17°C (62.6°F)
Alaskan sled dogs
61.5†
-17°C (1.4°F)
17°C (62.6°F)
*Blaza SE. Energy requirements of dogs in cool conditions.
Canine Practice 1982; 9: 10-15.
**Zentek J, Meyer H. Energieaufnahme adulter Deutscher Doggen.
Berliner und Münchner Tierärztliche Wochenschrift 1992; 105:
325-327.
***Meyer H. Energie und Nährstoffe–Stoffwechsel und Bedarf. In:
Ernährung des Hundes. Stuttgart, Germany: Eugen Ulmer,
1990; 99.
†Durrer JL, Hannon JP. Seasonal variations in caloric intake of
dogs living in an arctic environment. American Journal of
Physiology 1962; 202: 375-378.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 63 ---
aging on body composition in Labrador retrievers found that
the percentage of fat mass was directly related to age (r2 = 0.50).
The same study also found that lean body mass was inversely
related to age (r2 = 0.52) (Harper, 1998a). Because energy
requirements are related to lean body mass, reduced activity and
lean body mass may contribute to reduced energy requirements.
The reduction in lean mass and increase in fat mass associated
with aging could also result from decreased levels of growth
hormone (Harper, 1998a).
ACTIVITY
Activity significantly influences energy requirements (i.e.,
standing up requires 40% more energy than lying down)
(Meyer, 1983), yet recommendations for MER do not always
mention the degree of activity included. Most of the dispar-
ities in the literature for MER and RER are attributed to dif-
ferent activity levels of animals studied. Short bouts of
intense physical exercise may cause only small increases in
DER, but prolonged exercise can increase energy require-
ments four- to eightfold over RER. The DER for dogs with
normal activity is 1.6 to 1.8 x RER. This requirement
increases to 2 x RER for dogs doing light work, 3 x RER for
dogs doing moderate work and 4 to 8 x RER for dogs doing
heavy work. Many pets, however, are less active than their
owners perceive. Many pets in the United States may have
less than “normal activity;” and are overweight and obese
(Chapter 27). Therefore, it may be prudent to start DER cal-
culations lower than 1.6 and increase DER if needed to
maintain body condition.
THERMOREGULATION
The influence of housing and climate should not be neglect-
ed when evaluating energy requirements.When kept outside in
cold weather, dogs may need 10 to 90% more calories than dur-
ing optimal weather conditions (Table 5-3). Heat losses are
minimal at a temperature range called the thermoneutral zone.
The environmental temperature range at which dogs reach
their minimum metabolic rate is breed specific and is lower
when the thermic insulation (e.g., coat density and length, skin
insulation) is better (Kleiber, 1961; Männer, 1991; Meyer,
1983, 1990; Zentek and Meyer, 1992).The thermoneutral zone
was estimated at 15 to 20°C for longhaired and 20 to 25°C for
shorthaired breeds (Kleiber, 1961; Männer, 1991; Meyer, 1983,
1990). For Alaskan sled dogs, it may be as low as 10 to 15°C
(Meyer, 1983, 1990).
At temperatures above the thermoneutral zone, energy is
expended to dissipate heat. Conversely, at temperatures below
the thermoneutral zone, energy is used to maintain core body
temperature. The degree to which environmental temperature
affects energy needs of an animal also depends on air move-
ment (wind chill factor), air humidity (Meyer, 1983) and the
degree of acclimatization (NRC, 1985). Animal factors includ-
ing insulative characteristics of skin and coat (subcutaneous fat,
hair length and coat density) (NRC, 1985; Meyer, 1983; Finke,
1991; Meyer and Heckötter, 1986) and differences in stature,
behavior and activity (Finke, 1991; Meyer and Heckötter,
1986) interact and affect DER.
NEUTER STATUS
There is a paucity of information in the literature regarding
the effect of neuter status on energy requirements. Neutering
(castration, ovariohysterectomy) of animals is thought to be
associated with the development of obesity because of a com-
bination of factors including reduced activity and changes in
BER. Data suggest that intact cats have higher energy require-
ments than those that have been neutered (Flynn et al, 1996;
Root et al, 1996). Neutered cats may be less able to self-regu-
late food intake than intact cats and thus are predisposed to eat
more food and to become obese (Flynn et al, 1996).
In dogs, it is unknown whether increases in body weight after
neutering result from increases in appetite and thus food intake
or a reduction in energy expenditure or both. In a study of six
dogs, the fasting energy expenditure was reduced from 37.1
kcal/BWkg/day (155 kJ) to 33.9 (142 kJ) and 35.3 (148 kJ) at
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
64
Box 5-5. Quick Feline Feeding Guide.
Unlike dogs, most breeds of cats have a similar body size and
weight (with the exception of certain large breeds like the Maine
coon cat). Therefore, a starting point for feeding cats can be
simplified. Assuming the ideal body weight for most cats is
approximately 3.6 kg (8 lb) and apply this body weight to the
equations in Table 5-2.
WEIGHT LOSS
Weight loss = 0.8 x RER = 0.8 x (70 x [3.60.75]) = approximate-
ly 150 kcal/day.*
If a wet food contains 150 kcal/can then offer the cat one
can/day.
If a dry food contains 450 kcal/cup then offer the cat 1/3 cup
of food/day.
PREVENTION OF WEIGHT GAIN
Weight prevention (inactive/obese-prone cats) = 1.0 x RER =
1.0 x (70 x [3.60.75]) = offer the cat approximately 180 kcal/day.
If a wet food contains 150 kcal/can then offer the cat 1 and 1/5
cans/day.
If a dry food contains 450 kcal/cup then offer the cat 2/5 cup
of food/day.
FEEDING FOR MAINTENANCE
Maintenance = 1.2 x RER = 1.2 x (70 x [3.60.75]) = offer the cat
approximately 200 kcal/day.
If a wet food contains 150 kcal/can then offer the cat 1 and 1/3
cans/day.
If a dry food contains 450 kcal/cup then offer the cat 1/3 cup
of food per day.
Key: RER = resting energy requirement.
*These are starting points and food offerings should be adjust-
ed to maintain or achieve the desired body weight.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 64 ---
30 and 90 days postneutering, respectively (Anatharanman-
Barr, 1990).
BREED
Some breeds such as Newfoundlands and huskies have rela-
tively lower energy requirements, whereas Great Danes have
energy requirements above the average (Kienzle and Rainbird,
1991; Rainbird and Kienzle, 1990; Zentek and Meyer, 1992).
Breed-specific needs probably reflect differences in: 1) tem-
perament (resulting in higher or lower activity), 2) stature, 3)
insulative capacity of skin and coat (which influence the degree
of heat loss) and 4) lean body mass. However, when data are
corrected for age, interbreed differences become less important
(Finke, 1994).
GENDER
In people, gender has a significant effect on energy require-
ment because of the proportionately greater muscle mass of
men. (Women have a greater proportion of body fat.) No effect
of gender, however, has been found in dogs (Männer, 1991;
Kienzle and Rainbird, 1991) or reported to occur in cats.
DISEASE, INJURY, INFECTION 
AND CANCER
As a result of metabolic and physiologic changes, animals
must recover from trauma, repair wounds, mount an immune
response or compete with cancer to survive. These processes
involve cellular work that requires energy. Energy-supplying
nutrients must be provided in sufficient amounts to prevent
catabolism of body tissues with resultant loss of function.
However, most sick animals are inactive and anorectic and;
therefore, their energy requirement is reduced. Thus, energy
requirements for diseased animals logically lie somewhere
between RER and DER. Although mathematical factors have
been reported to multiply times RER (or MER) to estimate
energy requirements for diseased dogs and cats (Kronfeld,
1991; Hill, 1993; Donoghue, 1989; Remillard and Thatcher,
1989), very few studies have verified their validity by measuring
the actual energy requirements of hospitalized dogs and cats
under various disease conditions (Chapters 25 and 26).
One investigator recommended a practical approach in
which the RER and DER are used as references to assess
whether a sick animal’s voluntary food consumption is ade-
quate or inadequate (Burkholder, 1995). Forced nutritional
intervention is recommended if food consumption is less than
the calculated RER. If food intake approaches DER for adult
maintenance, additional nutritional support is probably not
needed. Regardless of whether a sick animal consumes food
voluntarily or is forced to eat, the food should have a nutrient
composition that is optimized for recovery as discussed in
Chapters 25 and 26.
WEIGHT LOSS/UNDERWEIGHT
The prevalence of suboptimal body condition begins to
increase at about 11 years of age and rises sharply in very old
animals, especially cats (Armstrong and Lund, 1996). Anorexia
is common in elderly people and can also occur in older cats
and dogs. Changes in appetite can be influenced by many fac-
tors including decline in acuity of taste and smell, dental prob-
lems, physical disabilities, acute or chronic diseases, drugs and
other therapies including dietary modifications. Prolonged
reductions in food intake ultimately lead to chronic energy
deficiency. As a result, loss of body weight occurs as body ener-
gy stores are diminished (fat and muscle protein).
In people, data show that reductions in body weight are lin-
early related to reductions in RER and are described by the
regression equation resting energy requirement (REE)
(kcal/day) = -78.8 + 11.9 x weight change (kg) (Saltzman and
Roberts, 1995). Decreases in lean tissue lead to decreased pro-
tein turnover, which reduces energy expenditure. Thus, reduc-
tions in RER are due in part to reductions in body protein
turnover and reduced body size. Other factors such as changes
in Na-K ATPase activity, hormonal changes affecting nutrient
metabolism and alterations in sympathetic nervous system
activity may also reduce overall RER in weight loss (Saltzman
and Roberts, 1995). Data from obese dogs suggest that RER
may be reduced by up to 25% following a weight loss of 17%
(Brown, 1991). It is unknown whether similar reductions in
65
Macronutrients
Box 5-6. Quick Canine Feeding Guide.
Unlike cats, dogs come in variable sizes from Chihuahuas to Great Danes. Therefore, the same assumptions cannot be made when simpli-
fying food offerings for dogs. However, daily feed offerings can be simplified for the initial food offering in kcal/lb body weight (Table 1).
Table 1. Summary of caloric food offerings per day.*
BW (lb)
Weight loss (1.0 x RER)
Inactive/obese prone (1.4 x RER)
Maintenance (1.6 x RER)
<10
20 kcal/lb 
28 kcal/lb 
32 kcal/lb
10–20 
15 kcal/lb 
21 kcal/lb 
24 kcal/lb
>20 
9 kcal/lb 
13 kcal/lb 
15 kcal/lb
Key: BW = body weight, RER = resting energy requirement.
*Example: A 15-lb dog would require 225 kcal/day (15 lb x 15 kcal) for weight loss. 
If a wet food contains 150 kcal/can then offer the dog 1 and 1/2 cans per day.
If a dry food contains 300 kcal/cup then offer the dog 3/4 cup of food per day.
These are starting points and food offerings should be adjusted to maintain or achieve the desired body weight.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 65 ---
RER occur in animals with normal body condition or older
animals that lose weight.
WEIGHT GAIN
Weight gain occurs in growth; the energy requirements dur-
ing growth have been discussed previously. Weight gain that
occurs in nongrowing animals results in changes in energy
requirements needed to maintain the increase in body weight
(Boxes 5-5 and 5-6). Research in people shows that REE
increases linearly with increases in body weight and gains in
lean body mass (Saltzman and Roberts, 1995).Theoretical cal-
culations of increased energy expenditure due to weight gain
and actual measurements agree closely and can be described by
the regression equation REE (kcal/day) = 55.6 + 16.9 x weight
change (kg) (Saltzman and Roberts, 1995).
The composition of the weight gain averaged 63% body fat
and 37% lean tissue in a summary of six studies involving 89
adult people (Saltzman and Roberts, 1995). The additional
energy needed to support weight gain is mainly due to the
amount of lean body mass that is gained and the energy
required to support the increased protein turnover in the newly
deposited protein.
There are no estimates supported by research using dogs and
cats to correlate composition of weight gain in adults with
changes in energy requirements. Therefore, in practice, dogs
and cats that need to gain weight are usually fed more food, or
a food with a higher energy density, until the desired weight has
been achieved.The new target body weight is then used to cal-
culate DER, and the pet is fed the amount of food necessary to
maintain the new desired body weight. This method is effec-
tive, but it is difficult to predict how much of a food increase is
truly needed or to estimate how long it will take for the animal
to gain the needed weight. Suggested energy calculations for
weight gain are summarized in Table 5-2.
CARBOHYDRATES INCLUDING FIBER
Simple Carbohydrates and Starches
Definition
Carbohydrates are composed of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen
in the general formula (CH2O)n (Figure 5-11). Carbohydrates
encompass: 1) simple sugars such as monosaccharides (e.g.,glu-
cose) and disaccharides (e.g., sucrose), 2) oligosaccharides
(three to nine sugar units; e.g., raffinose, stachyose) and 3) poly-
saccharides (more than nine sugar units). Examples of polysac-
charides include starches (amylose, amylopectin, glycogen),
hemicellulose, cellulose, pectins, gums, etc.
In a nutritional sense, polysaccharides, or as they are more
commonly known, complex carbohydrates, can be further
defined based on digestibility (Table 5-4). Complex carbohy-
drates that are digested by the animal’s endogenous digestive
enzymes are designated starches, whereas those polysaccharides
that are resistant to enzymatic digestion and thus are ferment-
ed by intestinal microbes are labeled fibers. Starches and fibers
differ chemically in that sugars in starches are linked with α-
glycosidic bonds, whereas sugars in fibers are linked by β-gly-
cosidic bonds. This small difference is important; mammalian
enzymes can break α-bonds but only microbial enzymes can
break β-bonds (Figure 5-11).
Structure
Simple sugars are divided into subgroups depending on the
number of carbon atoms they contain. Three-carbon sugars
(saccharides) are: 1) trioses (C3H6O3) such as glyceralde-
hyde, 2) four-carbon sugars are tetroses (C4H8O4), 3) five-
carbon sugars are pentoses (C5H10O5) such as ribose and
xylose, 4) six-carbon sugars are hexoses (C6H12O6) such as
glucose, galactose and fructose and 5) seven-carbon sugars are
called heptoses (C7H14O7). Only one disaccharide has been
found in mammals (i.e., lactose), whereas the most common
plant disaccharide is sucrose. Many oligosaccharides are com-
monly found in plants. The trisaccharide raffinose and the
tetrasaccharide stachyose are the two most common oligosac-
charides found in plants (e.g., soybeans and other legume
seeds, sugar beets, root crops and sugar beet molasses).
Longer chain oligosaccharides can be found in a variety of
plants used as food.
Starch is made up of glucose units in straight chains with
α1,4 bonds (amylose) and with α1,6 bonds that form branch-
es (Figure 5-11). Small intestinal digestive enzymes can break
the α1,4 and α1,6 bonds. Starches in plants are called amy-
lopectins whereas animal starch is called glycogen. Plant
starches exist as semicrystalline granules that vary in size,
shape and amount of other compounds (proteins) associated
with the granule.
The granular structure of starch affects the ease with which
it is digested (Table 5-5). Most starches in cooked and extrud-
ed pet foods are easily and rapidly digested. Raw or uncooked
starch is typically digested more slowly than cooked starch.
Some plant starches resist enzymatic digestion in the small
intestine (Englyst and Cummings, 1987) and have been named
resistant starch (RS). RS, by definition, is not enzymatically
digested in the small intestine, thus it becomes available for
microbial fermentation in the colon.
The amounts of rapidly digestible, slowly digestible and RS
in foods are highly variable and depend on the starch source,
type and extent of processing (BNF, 1990). Table 5-5 shows a
nutritional classification of the types of starch found in foods.
Function
The body uses simple carbohydrates and starches in foods as a
source of glucose. As such, they have several major functions.
First, they provide energy (ATP) via glycolysis and the TCA
cycle. Second, when metabolized for energy to carbon dioxide
and water, they are a source of heat for the body. Third, as they
proceed through metabolic pathways, certain products can be
used as building blocks for other nutrients, such as nonessential
amino acids, glycoproteins, glycolipids, lactose, vitamin C, etc.
Finally, simple carbohydrates and starches in excess of the
body’s immediate energy needs are stored as glycogen or con-
verted to fat.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
66
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 66 ---
67
Macronutrients
Figure 5-11. Components and classification of dietary carbohydrates. Dietary carbohydrates are usually classified as monosaccharides, dis-
accharides (sugars that yield two monosaccharides on hydrolysis) and polysaccharides (carbohydrates that yield nine or more monosaccha-
rides when hydrolyzed). Other carbohydrates are primarily components of dietary fiber.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 67 ---
IMPORTANCE OF CARBOHYDRATES
The primary purpose for adding carbohydrates and starches
to pet foods is to supply energy. Generally, assuming an average
digestibility (84%), carbohydrates supply about 3.5 kcal/g.
Although there is no minimum dietary requirement for simple
carbohydrates or starches per se, certain organs and tissues (e.g.,
brain and red blood cells) require glucose for energy. Glucose
can be obtained from precursor nutrients such as glucogenic
amino acids or glycerol from fats via gluconeogenic pathways.
The body always maintains a glucose supply to key tissues; thus,
if adequate dietary carbohydrates are unavailable, amino acids
will be shunted away from muscle growth, fetal growth and
milk production to be used for glucose synthesis.
When energy needs are high and tissue accretion is occurring
(e.g., during growth, gestation and lactation), adequate dietary
carbohydrates or glucose precursors are necessary to maintain
metabolic processes (Romsos et al, 1981; Kienzle et al, 1985;
Meyer and Kienzle, 1991; Blaza et al, 1989). In these situations,
carbohydrates become conditionally essential; therefore, foods
fed to growing animals and those with high-energy needs
should contain at least 20% carbohydrates.
In addition to nutritional reasons for adding carbohydrates to
pet foods, carbohydrates also are important in pet food process-
ing. Chapter 8 provides detailed information.
Metabolism
DIGESTION
Digestion of simple carbohydrates and starches occurs
throughout the digestive tract and involves mechanical, enzy-
matic and microbial processes. Mechanical breakdown occurs
primarily in the oral cavity. Because dogs and cats lack salivary
α-amylase, enzymatic digestion of starch is not initiated in
the mouth. In the stomach, food is mixed with gastric juices
(i.e., hydrochloric acid and proteolytic enzymes). Although
the stomach plays an important role in protein digestion, lit-
tle carbohydrate digestion occurs here. Simple carbohydrates
and starches are digested and absorbed in the small intestine.
Enzymes secreted from the pancreas digest the majority of
starches and sugars in the lumen of the small intestine, where-
as enzymes at the small intestinal mucosal brush border are
important in the final stages of carbohydrate digestion and
absorption.
Starch is initially cleaved by the enzyme α-amylase, which
creates branched oligosaccharides, the disaccharide maltose and
the trisaccharide maltotriose. The brush border enzymes mal-
tase, sucrase and isomaltase cleave the larger glucose chains into
single glucose molecules that are then absorbed. Sucrase also
splits the disaccharide sucrose into glucose and fructose units.
Lactase, another brush border enzyme, splits lactose, the sugar
found in milk, into glucose and galactose. Lactase activity is
usually high in young, suckling animals but often declines in
adults. Conversely, amylase, maltase and isomaltase display a
reverse temporal pattern; concentrations of these enzymes are
low in suckling animals and higher in adults (Meyer and
Kienzle, 1991; Kienzle, 1988). For example, in puppies, amylase
and sucrase activities increase by 21 days after birth and
increase further by Day 63 postpartum. This pattern suggests
that growing dogs have an increasing ability to digest carbohy-
drates from foods (Buddington et al, 2003).
Starch is made up of glucose units in straight chains (amy-
lose) and with branches (amylopectin) linked with α-bonds
(Figure 5-11). Starches are contained within granules in plants
in a highly crystalline formation. As foods containing starches
are heated or cooked with water, the starch crystals are melted
and hydrated, a process called gelatinization (Camire et al,
1990). The extent to which starch granules are disrupted and
the extent of gelatinization depend on many factors including
grinding, moisture, cooking time and temperature. For most
starches, digestibility increases with the degree of gelatiniza-
tion. Extrusion cooking, a process used in dry pet food produc-
tion, increases overall digestibility of starches in grains by gelat-
inizing starch.The canning process also results in gelatinization
of starch.
Several reports indicate that dogs and cats readily digest
starches in commercial pet foods (Meyer and Kienzle, 1991;
Gross et al, 1998; Walker et al, 1994; Schunemann et al, 1989).
In studies, dogs were fed foods in which 30 to 57% of the food
came from extruded corn, barley, rice or oats. The starch from
all grains was nearly 100% digested in the small intestine;
essentially no starch passed into the colon (Walker et al, 1994).
Other studies compared the digestibility of isolated raw
cornstarch, tapioca and potato starches and cooked rice starch
(Meyer and Kienzle, 1991; Schunemann et al, 1989). In these
studies, isolated starches contributed 40% of the DM of the
food. By the time the starch reached the colon, uncooked corn-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
68
Table 5-4. Classification and digestion of complex carbohydrates.*
Complex  
carbohydrate type 
Function
Digestion site 
Digestion products 
Starch, glycogen
Storage polysaccharide 
Small intestine 
Mono- and disaccharides 
in plants and animals 
(enzymatic)
(glucose, maltose)
Hemicellulose, cellulose
Structural parts of plant cell walls
Large intestine 
Volatile fatty acids (acetate, 
(microbial fermentation)
propionate, butyrate)
Lignins, cutins, waxes
Associated cell wall substances
Not digested or fermented
Excreted in feces
Gums, mucilages, pectins
Naturally occurring polysaccharides 
Large intestine 
Carbon dioxide, methane,
in plants 
(microbial fermentation)
hydrogen, volatile fatty acids
*Adapted from the British Nutrition Foundation. Complex Carbohydrates in Foods. New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1990.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 68 ---
starch was digested to the same degree as cooked rice starch
(>94% digested); however, uncooked potato (0%) and tapioca
starches (<70%) were poorly digested in the small intestine.
The uncooked tapioca starch subsequently resulted in increased
bacterial fermentation rates as evidenced by high volatile fatty
acid concentrations in the feces. Large amounts of easily fer-
mentable carbohydrates (e.g., tapioca starch) in the colon
increase the risk of excessive fermentation causing gas and flat-
ulence and upsetting the balance of microflora.
In feeding trials with cats, investigators demonstrated that
cooked cornstarch was nearly 100% digested when consumed
by cats at 4.7 g/kg body weight per day (Meyer and Kienzle,
1991; Kienzle, 1993, 1993a). Raw cornstarch was only 60 to
70% digested and raw potato starch was 40% or less digested
when consumed at 8.8 and 8.9 g/kg body weight per day. Most
commercial cat foods contain approximately 30 to 35% DM
carbohydrate. This level provides approximately 5 to 8 g of
starch/kg body weight per day, which should pose no digestive
or metabolic problems for cats (Meyer and Kienzle, 1991).
ABSORPTION
Glucose and galactose are absorbed through an active trans-
port mechanism using specific carrier proteins and a sodium
gradient. Fructose is absorbed by a separate carrier system that
appears not to be sodium dependent. Absorption occurs across
the small intestinal mucosa through villi. The enterocytes cov-
ering the villi contain the carbohydrate-digesting enzymes,
transport proteins and other enzymes used to synthesize
triglycerides and chylomicrons. Enterocytes can use absorbed
sugars for energy or the sugars can be released into portal blood
for transport to the liver and beyond.
Deficiency of digestive enzymes or failure of the energy-
dependent transport system may cause carbohydrate intoler-
ance or malabsorption. Many disaccharidase deficiencies result
from intestinal mucosal damage induced by infections and
other diseases. The resulting colonization of the lower small
intestine by colonic bacteria may result in bacterial proteolysis
of carbohydrate-digesting enzymes.
Unabsorbed carbohydrates in the intestinal lumen create
high osmotic pressure, reduce water and mineral absorption
and may result in small bowel diarrhea. In addition, excessive
fermentation of unabsorbed carbohydrates leads to bacterial
overgrowth, production of gas (carbon dioxide, hydrogen and
methane) and short-chain fatty acids. Excessive carbohydrate
fermentation can lead to flatulence, abdominal distention and
diarrhea. Carbohydrate intolerance may be diagnosed by find-
ing increased concentrations of hydrogen in the breath (breath
hydrogen analysis) as a result of bacterial fermentation (Bissett
et al, 1997).
USAGE
Glucose and other sugars derived from food arrive at the liver
via the portal blood. The liver plays a central role in synthesiz-
ing, storing, converting and releasing glucose for use by other
organs. Insulin and glucagon finely control the concentration of
blood glucose. The glycemic index ranks dietary carbohydrates
based on their effect on blood glucose. Carbohydrates that
result in a low postprandial blood glucose response have a lower
glycemic index and vice versa. Animals with impaired glucose
tolerance should consume foods that have a relatively low
glycemic index. Altering carbohydrate sources or adding fiber
can modulate the glycemic index.
The central nervous system and erythrocytes require glucose
for their energy needs, whereas other tissues can use other sub-
strates (e.g., muscle uses fatty acids). Glucose is metabolized via
glycolysis followed by the TCA cycle (Figure 5-7). Complete
oxidation of glucose to carbon dioxide, water, ATP and heat
requires oxygen and is termed aerobic metabolism. The final
transfer of energy from carbohydrate to ATP occurs via the
electron transport chain (Figure 5-4). If there is a shortage of
oxygen in tissues, such as occurs with intense exercise, some
ATP can be derived from glucose via anaerobic metabolism in
which glucose is partially metabolized to pyruvate (via glycoly-
sis) and then converted to lactic acid.
Glucose consumed in excess of immediate needs may be
stored as glycogen. The enzyme glycogen synthetase synthe-
sizes glycogen from glucose units. This enzyme is particularly
active in liver and muscles. Endurance athletes have used car-
bohydrate loading (i.e., eating large amounts of carbohydrate
several days before competition) to maximize muscle glycogen
stores. Carbohydrate loading in canine athletes has been prac-
ticed, but has not been widely researched (Chapter 18). After
glycogen stores are filled, additional dietary carbohydrates are
converted to long-chain fatty acids and stored as adipose tissue.
In the hours following digestion and absorption of a carbo-
hydrate-containing meal, the liver and other body tissues
switch from glycogen storage to glycogenolysis under the influ-
ence of an increased glucagon to insulin ratio. This ratio also
stimulates lipolysis, thus overall body metabolism switches
toward lipid use for energy. Glucose is synthesized from carbon
skeletons of amino acids, glycerol and lactic acid (gluconeoge-
nesis) to maintain plasma glucose concentration. This function
is critical to provide an adequate supply of glucose to the brain
(Figure 5-7). The liver and kidneys, but not muscles, are the
sites of gluconeogenesis; therefore, muscle cannot supply glu-
cose to the bloodstream.
STORAGE
The body stores sugar as glycogen, a glucose polysaccharide.
Its highest concentration is in the liver, but muscle tissue,
because of its greater mass, stores the most glycogen.
Ribose, although not a true carbohydrate store readily avail-
able for oxidation, is found as part of nucleic acids, ATP and
guanosine triphosphate (GTP). The body also has stores of
sugar-protein complexes (glycoproteins, mucus and proteogly-
cans) and sugar-lipid complexes (glycolipids).
EXCRETION
Excreted products resulting from normal carbohydrate
metabolism include carbon dioxide in the breath, heat radiating
from the body and water. In cases of malabsorption of simple
sugars and starches, increased intestinal fermentation may lead
69
Macronutrients
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 69 ---
to more hydrogen in expired breath and flatus and short-chain
fatty acids in stools. Animals with deranged carbohydrate
metabolism (diabetes mellitus, ketosis, glycogen storage dis-
eases and fructose, galactose and pyruvate enzyme deficiencies)
may have elevated urinary or plasma levels of the metabolic
intermediates related to the specific disease (glucose, ketones,
lactic acid, oxalate, etc.). Chapter 29 discusses treatment of the
most common disease of abnormal carbohydrate metabolism,
diabetes mellitus.
Carbohydrates of Special Importance
XYLOSE
Xylose is a five-carbon sugar used in clinical veterinary med-
icine to assess intestinal absorptive capacity, alterations in GI
emptying, bacterial overgrowth and exocrine pancreatic insuffi-
ciency (Chapters 54, 60 and 66). When xylose is administered
orally, approximately 48% is expected to be absorbed into the
bloodstream and excreted in urine (Williams and Guilford,
1996). Altered xylose absorption can be diagnostic for certain
diseases. The xylose absorption test is typically only recom-
mended for use in dogs; there is too much individual variabili-
ty in results from cats (Williams and Guilford, 1996).
LACTULOSE
Lactulose is a synthetic disaccharide containing galactose
and fructose connected by a β1,4 bond. Lactulose is formed
when lactose (galactose and glucose) is subjected to isomeriza-
tion in aqueous alkaline solutions. Lactulose is not hydrolyzed
by mammalian enzymes, but can be digested by microbial
enzymes; thus, it is fermented in the colon. Lactulose enhances
the growth of specific types of bacteria (Lactobacillus bifidus),
has laxative effects and acidifies the colon to aid in ammonia
trapping. Fermentation of excessive amounts of lactulose may
worsen flatulence and cause diarrhea. Clinically, lactulose is
often given to help manage hepatic encephalopathy (Chapter
68).(It is also occasionally administered before breath hydrogen
collection and used with a xylose absorption test to differenti-
ate among small intestinal disease, bacterial overgrowth and
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (Chapters 55, 60 and 66).
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS
Glycosaminoglycans are complex polysaccharides associated
with proteins. They form integral parts of the interstitial fluid,
cartilage, skin and tendons. The primary glycosaminoglycans
are chondroitin sulfate and hyaluronic acid. Chondroitin sulfate
is a polymer of two alternating sugar units, glucuronic acid and
N-acetylgalactosamine. Hyaluronic acid is a linear polymer of
two sugars: glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine.
Chondroitin sulfate and other glycosaminoglycans are available
as dietary supplements with alleged benefits for arthritic condi-
tions, degenerative joint diseases and geriatric patients in gen-
eral. In one study using a combination of oral chondroitin sul-
fate and glucosamine in human patients with osteoarthritis of
the knee joint, there was no pain relief in the overall patient
population, but there was some benefit for patients with mod-
erate to severe pain (Clegg et al, 2006).
RESISTANT STARCH
RS (Table 5-5) is a fraction of starch found in foods that
potentially resists digestion in the small intestine (Englyst and
Cummings, 1987). RS is classified according to the rapidity
with which glucose is released from a starch source and is a
fraction of the total amount of starch that remains after a sam-
ple is incubated for 100 minutes with the enzymes pancreatin
and amyloglucosidase. Four types of RS have been identified
(Brown, 1996):
RS1 = starch physically trapped within the starch granule
that is released during processing and chewing.
RS2 = starch granular structures (e.g., those found in raw
potato, bananas and tapioca).
RS3 = recrystallized starch formed after cooking, when the
starch cools or is dried.
RS4 = chemically modified starch resistant to enzymatic
hydrolysis.
RS1 and RS2 represent the residues of starches that are
digested very slowly and incompletely in the small intestine.
RS3 is highly resistant to digestion by intestinal enzymes and is
fermented by colonic bacteria.
Physiologically, RS are thought to have various functions
related to their dietary fiber-like properties including reducing
the glycemic index of food, decreasing the glucose and insulin
responses to food and improving bowel health (Brown et al,
2001). In particular, RS can be used as a source of fiber for
gluten-free or hypoallergenic foods.
OLIGOSACCHARIDES
Oligosaccharides are polymers that contain up to nine sug-
ars. Oligosaccharides that contain fructose are termed fruc-
tooligosaccharides (FOS). Although FOS are the most exten-
sively studied oligosaccharides, other oligosaccharides include
mannanoligosaccharides (MOS),
galactooligosaccharides
(GOS), xylooligosaccharides (XOS), isomaltooligosaccharides
(IMOS), soybean oligosaccharides (SOS), pectic oligosaccha-
rides, chitooligosaccharide, lactusucrose and lactulose or other
polysaccharide/oligosaccharide-containing sources such as
inulin. Oligosaccharides resist digestion by enzymes in the
small intestine and enter the colon intact. In the colon, certain
bacteria (bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus spp.) readily ferment
oligosaccharides, which enhances the bacterial growth rate
(Roberfroid et al, 1998, 1993; Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995;
Hidaka et al, 1986; Bunce et al, 1995, Flickinger et al, 2000;
Grieshop et al, 2004). Increased numbers of these bacterial
species may benefit the overall health of people and other ani-
mals, including pigs, rabbits and rats (Bunce et al, 1995;
Willard et al, 1994; Howard et al, 1995).
Bifidobacteria produce short-chain fatty acids that decrease
the intestinal pH and inhibit the growth of pathogenic bacte-
ria. FOS reduce fasting blood glucose levels, cholesterol and
low-density lipoproteins (LDL) in people with diabetes melli-
tus (Yamishita et al, 1984). The benefits of oligosaccharides
such as FOS, MOS and GOS in dogs, pigs, rabbits and rats
include improved intestinal flora (i.e., reduced numbers of
pathogens), reduced mortality, improved feed efficiency,
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
70
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 70 ---
improved weight gain, increased nitrogen digestion and reten-
tion, reduced body fat, improved stool quality and reduced fecal
odor (Grieshop et al, 2004; Flickinger et al, 2003, 2000; Bunce
et al, 1995; Willard et al, 1994; Delzenne et al, 1993; Morissee
et al, 1992).
Analyses
The total carbohydrate content of pet foods and ingredients is
not typically determined directly by analysis but indirectly by
difference. NFE is the carbohydrate fraction of a proximate
analysis. NFE is determined by adding the percentages of
water,crude protein,crude fat,ash and crude fiber and subtract-
ing from 100%. NFE is primarily made up of readily digestible
carbohydrates (e.g., sugars and starches) (Figure 5-3).
Techniques such as gas-liquid chromatography and high-
performance liquid chromatography can be used to separate
and analyze different monosaccharides. In addition, colori-
metric enzymatic assays specific for each sugar are available.
The starch content of foods can be determined by heating the
sample to gelatinize the starch followed by incubation with
starch-digesting enzymes (amyloglucosidase and pancreatin).
The amount of glucose liberated by enzymatic hydrolysis is
analyzed and converted to starch content (Herrera-Saldana
and Huber, 1989).
Requirements, Deficiencies and Excesses
Dogs and cats do not have an absolute dietary requirement for
carbohydrates in the same way that essential amino acids or
fatty acids must be provided.They do, however, have a require-
ment for adequate glucose or glucose precursors to provide
essential fuel for the central nervous system. When energy
needs are high and anabolic processes are proceeding at an
active rate (e.g., during growth, gestation and lactation), it is
best to supply a food containing readily digestible carbohy-
drates and starches. Without dietary carbohydrates, there is
added strain on lipid and protein metabolic pathways to supply
glucose precursors (NRC, 2006). Lipolysis must be increased to
provide energy and glycerol units for gluconeogenesis.
Similarly, glucogenic amino acids from dietary protein must be
used for glucose formation; therefore, these amino acids are not
available to meet body protein synthesis requirements.
From a practical standpoint, whether carbohydrate is essen-
tial in the food or not is of little importance because most com-
mercially prepared pet foods contain carbohydrates well in
excess of glucose requirements. Grains such as corn, rice, wheat,
barley and oats provide the bulk of starch in commercial pet
foods and are well digested and absorbed due to the cooking
and extrusion processes used to make pet foods.
CANINE CARBOHYDRATE 
REQUIREMENTS
Gestation and lactation increase the need for glucose to sup-
port fetal growth and lactose synthesis in milk. In one study,
pregnant bitches were fed a high-fat but carbohydrate-free (0%
of energy from carbohydrate) food with 26% of ME from pro-
tein. They developed hypoglycemia the week before whelping
and had reduced plasma concentrations of lactate and alanine,
a reduced number of live births, lethargy and reduced mother-
ing ability compared with bitches fed a food containing 44% of
ME as starch (Romsos et al, 1981). In another study using 51%
of ME as protein, pregnant bitches fed either a starch-free or
starch-containing diet performed similarly (Blaza et al, 1989).
Extensive research in dogs indicates that a starch-free food
containing at least 33% of ME from protein is necessary to
supply needed glucose precursors (Kienzle et al, 1985). Fetal
abnormalities, embryo resorption, ketosis and reduced milk
production are other possible adverse effects of providing
inadequate carbohydrate during gestation and lactation
(NRC, 2006).
Overall,a minimum of 23% carbohydrate is recommended in
foods for gestating and lactating bitches. Excess starch in the
food typically does not cause health problems in dogs. Dry
extruded dog foods typically contain 30 to 60% carbohydrate,
mostly starch, and cause no adverse effects. Excesses of simple
sugars in commercial pet foods are also not a practical concern
because sugar levels are usually low. On the other hand, carbo-
hydrate intolerances may occur in some animals as a result of
primary or secondary disaccharidase deficiencies. For animals
with obesity or diabetes mellitus, foods with low glycemic
indices are indicated for controlling the postprandial increase in
blood glucose.
FELINE CARBOHYDRATE 
REQUIREMENTS
Normal cats can maintain adequate blood glucose levels
when fed low-carbohydrate, high-protein foods (Kittlehut et al,
1978). Cats have some unique metabolic differences that limit
their ability to efficiently use large amounts of absorbed dietary
carbohydrate. For example, cats have low activities of the intes-
tinal disaccharidases sucrase and lactase (Kienzle, 1993b); fur-
thermore, the sugar transportation system in the feline intestine
does not adapt to various levels of dietary carbohydrates. Cats
71
Macronutrients
Table 5-5. Nutritional classification of starch.*
Probable 
Example of
digestion in
Type of starch
occurrence
the small intestine
Rapidly digestible
Freshly cooked
Rapid and complete
starch
starchy food
Slowly digestible 
starch
Most raw cereals
Slow and complete
Resistant starch
Physically 
inaccessible starch Partly milled grain 
and seeds
Resistant
Resistant starch 
granules
Raw potato and 
banana
Resistant
Recrystallized 
starch
Cooled, cooked 
potato, bread and 
cornflakes
Resistant
*Adapted from the British Nutrition Foundation. Complex
Carbohydrates in Foods. New York, NY: Von Nostrand Reinhold,
1990.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 71 ---
produce only 5% of the pancreatic amylase that dogs produce
(Kienzle, 1993). Unlike dogs, cats lack hepatic glucokinase
activity, which limits their ability to metabolize large amounts
of simple carbohydrates (Kienzle, 1993b; McDonald et al,
1984). Glucokinase is responsible for phosphorylating glucose
to G-6-P in the pathway of glucose oxidation. Feline liver is
also thought to lack fructokinase (McDonald et al, 1984).
The metabolic differences between cats and dogs support
the classification of cats as strict carnivores, adapted to a low-
carbohydrate diet, and dogs as omnivores. If large amounts of
carbohydrates are fed to cats (e.g., more than 40% of the
food’s DM), signs of maldigestion occur (e.g., diarrhea, bloat-
ing and gas) (Meyer and Kienzle, 1991) and adverse metabol-
ic effects can occur (e.g., hyperglycemia and excretion of sig-
nificant amounts of glucose in urine). Despite the limitations
of digestive capacity and metabolism, the starch levels found
in commercial cat foods (up to 35% of the food’s DM) are
well tolerated. There are also differences among carbohydrate
sources and their effects on blood glucose due to the glycemic
index of the specific carbohydrate source. Of the cereal grains,
in cats, rice has the greatest effect on postprandial blood glu-
cose levels compared to corn, barley and sorghum (Bouchard
and Sunvold, 2000).
Sources
Starches are the primary carbohydrates found in corn, wheat,
rice, barley, oats and potatoes (Table 5-6). Meat is a poor car-
bohydrate source. Commercial extruded pet foods use starches
in grains to provide structure, texture and form to extruded kib-
bles. In addition, the extrusion process gelatinizes starch, which
makes it easily and rapidly digested in the small intestine of
dogs and cats. Most starches from grains are easily digested in
the small intestine, when fed uncooked (raw) or cooked to dogs
and cats (Meyer and Kienzle, 1991; Gross et al, 1998; Walker
et al, 1994). Potato starch is an exception. Raw potato starch is
contained in granules that have a crystalline structure that
resists digestion by people, dogs and cats (Meyer and Kienzle,
1991; Englyst and Cummings, 1987a). Freshly cooked potato
starch, however, is highly digestible. A study showed that rap-
idly digestible starch increased from 24 to 65% when extruded
(Murray, 2001). However, starch begins to recrystallize when
cooled or dried. In vitro digestion studies and studies in people
show that up to 13% of the recrystallized potato starch resists
digestion by pancreatic amylase and thus will be fermented in
the colon (Englyst and Cummings, 1987a; Cummings and
Englyst, 1995).
RS in cereal grains (rice, barley, wheat, sorghum and corn)
and potato flour converted to rapidly digestible forms with low
or high temperature extrusion (Murray et al, 2001; Spears and
Fahey, 2004). Bacteria normally present in the small intestine of
dogs and cats are able to use these starches; up to 39% of their
organic matter disappears after five hours of fermentation
(Murray et al, 2001). An in vitro study showed that the RS con-
centrations of selected feed ingredients corresponded inversely
to their ileal digestibility. For example legumes (various beans
and peas) with an average of 25% RS had an ileal starch
digestibility of 21%, whereas cereal grains had an average of
15% RS and flours with 3% RS had ileal starch digestibilities of
60 and 65% respectively (Bednar, 2001). However, the RS frac-
tion is fermented in the large intestine, contributing to its func-
tional properties as a fiber. Fermentation of RS in the colon
produces butyrate, which is important for the health of colono-
cytes. Some legumes (e.g., soybeans) contain significant quan-
tities of raffinose and stachyose, which can be digested by gut
microflora but not by canine and feline digestive enzymes.
These sugars allegedly cause digestive abnormalities (e.g., flat-
ulence) due to the gaseous waste products produced by bacter-
ial fermentation.
Sugar is sometimes added to enhance palatability of foods for
dogs. Commercial semi-moist cat foods use mono- and disac-
charides as functional ingredients to achieve texture and moist-
ness and to prevent spoilage. Pet food with gravies and sauces
may contain dextrins, corn syrup and other starches for texture
and appearance. Sucrose does not enhance palatability of foods
for cats because cats have few sucrose-sensitive taste buds
(NRC, 2006; Boudreau and White, 1978). A dog’s ability to
taste sweetness is different from a person’s because of differ-
ences in the number and type of sweetness receptors on taste
buds (Boudreau and White, 1978; Boudreau, 1989).Therefore,
the sweetness rankings of different sugars developed for people
are not applicable to cats and dogs. Unlike in people and other
primates, dietary sugars do not present a risk for dental caries
in dogs and cats (Chapter 47).
Fiber
Definition
Fiber refers to a multitude of compounds categorized as com-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
72
Table 5-6. Sources of dietary carbohydrates.
Carbohydrate
Sources
Amylopectin (plant starch)
Starchy plants; grains; used as 
thickener in processed foods
Amylose (plant starch)
Starchy plants; grains
Carrageenan
Red seaweed; used in candies and 
some processed foods
Cellulose
Substituent of plant cell walls; major 
component of wheat bran
Corn syrup
Used in processed foods
Dextrins
Used in processed foods
D-Fructose
Fruits; traces in most plant foods; 
honey; maple sugar
D-Galactose
Component of lactose; produced 
during digestion
D-Glucose (dextrose)
Fruits; traces in most plant foods; 
honey; maple sugar
Glycogen (animal starch)
Liver; muscle
Hemicellulose
Substituent of plant cell walls
High-fructose corn syrup
Used in processed foods
Lactose (milk sugar)
Milk; dairy products 
Lignin
Substituent of plant cell walls
Maltose
Sprouted grain; produced during 
digestion of starches
Pectins
Fruits
Raffinose, stachyose, 
verbacose
Plant “antifreeze”
Sucrose
Cane sugar; beet sugar; fruits; 
maple sugar
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 72 ---
plex carbohydrates (Table 5-4). Fibers differ from starches in
that fibers resist enzymatic digestion in the small intestine. As
a result, microbes in the colon usually ferment fibers. Fibers
include cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin, gums and RS (See pre-
vious discussion.) and are unique because of the types of sugars
they contain and the resultant chemical bonds.
Chemical Structure
Unlike starches, cellulose is a polymer of glucose units bonded
by β1,4-linkages (rather than α linkages) that are only broken
by microbial enzymes (Figure 5-11). Cellulose is the most
abundant polysaccharide in plants, forming the structure of
plant cell walls. In plants, hydrogen bonds closely hold straight
cellulose chains to one another forming orderly and compact
aggregates called fibrils. Cellulose fibrils contain regions that
are highly crystalline and other regions that are more random
and amorphous. Cellulose is usually associated with hemicellu-
lose and lignin within plant cell walls. Water-soluble chemical
derivatives of cellulose, including carboxymethylcellulose,
methylcellulose and hydroxypropylcellulose, are used as stabi-
lizers, thickeners and emulsifiers in pet and human foods such
as ice cream, gravies, soups and beverages. Cellulose is also
added to weight-reduction foods for people and pets to dilute
calories and provide bulk. Cellulose is not very water soluble
but can have significant water-holding capacity and is slowly
fermented by microbes in the colon.
Hemicelluloses are composed primarily of glucose, galactose,
mannose, xylose, arabinose and uronic acids joined together in
different combinations and various linkages. Hemicelluloses are
closely associated with the cellulose in the cell walls of plants.
Most hemicelluloses are not water soluble because of their var-
ious structures and composition.
Pectin is a linear chain of galacturonic acid linked by α1,4-
glycosidic bonds found in cell walls and intercellular regions of
plants. The linear galacturonic chain of most pectins is inter-
rupted by other sugars (e.g., galactose, arabinose and rhamnose)
to form branches and kinks. Pectins are found in high levels in
fruits and vegetables such as apples, strawberries, raspberries,
carrots, broccoli, potatoes, sugar beet pulp and the skins of cit-
rus fruits.Commercially,pectin is extracted from either apple or
citrus waste after the manufacture of juice. Pectins are water
soluble, form viscous gels and are rapidly fermented by intestin-
al bacteria.
Gum is a general term for the diverse group of viscous and
sticky polysaccharides found in the seeds and exudates of
plants. The sugars that make up gums are diverse, and the pre-
cise structural information for some gums is unknown. Gum
arabic, guar gum, gellan gum, konjac gum, carrageenan gum,
psyllium gum, xanthan gum, carob gum, gum ghatti and gum
tragacanth are just a few of the gums used as thickening agents,
water binders, stabilizers, emulsifiers and gelling agents in jams,
pie fillings, confectionery products, sauces, salad dressings,
canned meat products and moist pet foods. Depending on their
source and processing, gums have variable viscosity and solubil-
ity in water and thus have variable fermentation rates. Intestinal
bacteria moderately to rapidly ferment most gums.
Lignin is not a carbohydrate in the strictest chemical defini-
tion; however, it is often considered a fiber because it makes up
the structural part of plant cell walls and is not digested by
mammalian intestinal enzymes. Lignin is not a single chemical
compound but a series of compounds made from derivatives of
phenylpropane associated in complex cross-linked structures.
Lignin is highly resistant to enzymatic (intestinal and bacteri-
al) digestion and chemical degradation. Strong chemical bonds
between lignin and plant cell wall fibers, proteins and other
compounds make lignins unavailable during digestion.
Other plant polysaccharides can also be considered as fibers.
These include fructans (inulin), galactans, mannans, mucilages
and β-glucans with β1,3- and β1,2-glucose bonds. Amounts of
these fibers in foods are usually quite low.
73
Macronutrients
Carbohydrate and  
fiber fractions
Method 
Fiber solubility 
Total dietary  
fiber analysis 
Crude fiber
analysis 
Fructans, galactans, 
mannans, mucilages 
Pectin
Hemicellulose 
Cellulose 
Lignin
Resistant starch
Starch
Mono- and  
disaccharides 
Rapidly fermentable 
Not digested or fermented
Moderately fermentable 
Enzymatically digested 
Absorbed
Moderately fermentable 
Slowly fermentable 
Soluble fiber
Insoluble fiber
Total dietary fiber
Crude fiber
Figure 5-12. Physiochemical and analytical properties of dietary fiber components.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 73 ---
Other Classifications of Fiber
In addition to classifying fibers by their structure as described
above, fibers have been classified by their rate of fermentation,
digestible and indigestible fractions, solubility in water, water-
holding capacity and viscosity (Figure 5-12). The different
ways of classifying fibers allow the important physiologic func-
tions and diverse effects of fiber in animals to be highlighted
and understood.
Fiber sources can be described as rapidly to slowly fer-
mentable (Figure 5-13). Rapidly fermented fibers produce
more short-chain fatty acids and gases in a shorter period of
time compared to fiber sources that ferment more slowly
(Sunvold et al, 1994, 1994a). Slowly fermentable fiber sources
used in pet foods contain primarily celluloses and hemicellulos-
es including purified cellulose and peanut hulls. Citrus and
apple pectins and most gums are rapidly fermented. Fiber
sources that contain mixtures of pectins,hemicelluloses and cel-
luloses (e.g., rice bran, oat bran, wheat bran, soy fibers, soy hulls
and beet pulp) are moderately fermentable.The rate and extent
of fiber fermentation are important distinguishing characteris-
tics when discussing physiologic functions of fiber. As the fer-
mentation rate of fiber increases,GI transit time decreases,fecal
bulk decreases and fecal bile acid excretion increases.
Fiber is also classified according to solubility, or the ability
of a fiber to disperse in water. Most rapidly fermentable fibers
such as pectins and gums are “soluble.” Lignin and the slowly
fermentable fibers such as cellulose and most hemicelluloses
are “insoluble.” All fibers hold water to some degree; howev-
er, the soluble fibers have a greater water-holding capacity and
may form gels and viscous solutions within the GI tract. A
new classification of fiber relates to the ability of certain
microorganisms in the gut to use fiber as food. Fibers are clas-
sified as “prebiotic fibers,” which are defined as “non-
digestible food ingredients that selectively stimulate a limited
number of bacteria in the colon to improve host health”
(Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995). (See below.) The definition
implies that prebiotic fibers are resistant to hydrolysis by
mammalian enzymes, are able to support the growth of ben-
eficial bacteria and do not support the growth of potential
pathogens, although some prebiotic fibers do support growth
of putative pathogens to a limited degree.
Fiber concentration, ionic concentration, pH, particle size
and the hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties of polysaccha-
ride structures affect the viscosity of fibers in water. An increase
in viscosity in the GI tract can slow nutrient absorption, reduce
postprandial glycemia, slow gastric emptying, delay mouth to
cecum transit and reduce interactions of food particles with
digestive enzymes and epithelial surfaces. The fermentation
rate of a fiber interacts with its water-holding capacity and vis-
cosity to affect the degree of fecal bulking (volume). For mod-
erately and slowly fermentable fibers, the degree of fecal bulk-
ing is related to water-holding capacity. Slowly fermented fibers
(e.g., cellulose) are the most effective stool bulking agents
because they retain their structure longer and are thus able to
bind water. For rapidly fermentable fibers, the increased bound
water reduces fecal bulk. In fact, most fermentable fibers have
laxative effects and may produce diarrhea if fed at high levels.
An increase in fecal bulk has been advocated for the treatment
and prevention of irritable bowel syndrome, constipation and
other GI disorders (Chapters 48 to 65).
Function
The primary function and benefit of adequate dietary fiber are
to increase bulk and water in the intestinal contents (Leib,
1990; Twedt, 1993; Gurr and Asp, 1994). Fiber appears to
shorten intestinal transit rate in dogs with normal or slow
transit time and prolong it in dogs with rapid transit rate
(Burrows et al, 1982). Together, these factors help promote
and regulate normal bowel function. In addition, the typical
end products of microbial fermentation of fiber (acetate, pro-
pionate and butyrate) are important in maintaining colonic
health. Fiber decreases luminal pH through production of
short-chain fatty acids and increases the population of anaer-
obic flora. The antibacterial properties of short-chain fatty
acids may decrease pathogenic intestinal bacteria, increase
resistance of the gut to colonization by pathogenic bacteria
and may be important in prevention of and recovery from
intestinal disorders and cancer (Twedt, 1993; Gurr and Asp,
1994; Burrows et al, 1982; Salter et al, 1993). Dietary fibers
classified as prebiotics also increase beneficial bacteria that
protect the GI tract against colonization by pathogens.
Prebiotic fibers may also reduce fecal odor by modifying fecal
concentrations of metabolites and, via their carbohydrate
residues, improve immune function by influencing gut-asso-
ciated immune cells. (See below.)
Colonocytes preferentially use butyrate, an end product of
fiber fermentation, as their energy source rather than glucose
or amino acids (Roediger, 1982). In addition, short-chain
fatty acids facilitate absorption of sodium, chloride and water
in the colon. The gut microflora produce an array of com-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
74
Figure 5-13. Relative degree of fermentation of various dietary
fiber sources in the gastrointestinal tract of dogs and cats. At the
extremes are pectin and gums, which are rapidly fermentable, and
cellulose, which is slowly fermentable. Other fiber sources such as
soy hulls and beet pulp are intermediate and termed moderately
fermentable.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 74 ---
pounds in addition to short-chain fatty acids, including
biotin, vitamin K, carbon dioxide and methane. In cases in
which short-chain fatty acids are absent (parenteral nutrition,
partial bowel resection), the colonic mucosa atrophies,
becomes inflamed and has decreased resistance to bacterial
translocation. However, excessive fermentation and produc-
tion of short-chain fatty acids may be accompanied by flatu-
lence, abdominal distention and diarrhea. The rate and extent
of fiber fermentation in the large intestine are important
aspects of overall digestion and absorption of ingested nutri-
ents. Short-chain fatty acids are an important energy source
for cattle and horses (i.e., supply up to 75% of DER); howev-
er, they provide less than 5% of the energy needs of dogs and
cats because of the short intestinal tract and relatively fast
transit time in these species (Brody, 1994).
Importance of Fiber in Foods for Dogs and Cats
Research results demonstrate the need for some fiber in foods
to maintain health and optimal function of the entire GI tract,
but especially for colonocytes (BNF, 1990). In people, dietary
fiber has been used to help manage diabetes mellitus, obesity,
gallstones, hypercholesterolemia, irritable bowel syndrome,
constipation, colonic diverticulosis, colorectal cancer, celiac dis-
ease, Crohn’s disease, migraine headaches, hyperactivity in chil-
dren and dental caries (BNF, 1990). Postnatal and age-related
changes in bacterial flora can affect health and resistance to dis-
ease (Buddington, 2003). A study of microflora in dogs showed
that potential pathogens such as Clostridium perfringens are
present in increased numbers in elderly animals (Benno et al,
1992). However in cats, use of prebiotic fibers decreases con-
centrations of pathogens, including C. perfringens (Terada et al,
1993). Different types and specific levels of dietary fiber can be
important in overall therapeutic management of specific disease
conditions in dogs and cats.
OBESITY AND BODY WEIGHT 
MANAGEMENT
A pet food containing slowly fermentable fiber can be very
effective for controlling body weight and treating obesity
(Chapter 27). Slowly fermentable fibers, such as cellulose or
peanut hulls, increase bulk in the stomach and intestines and
help promote a feeling of satiety when fewer calories are con-
sumed (Jewell and Toll,1996).Pets in weight-control programs
can eat more total food when the calories are diluted by fiber;
thus, the dog or cat eats fewer calories and loses weight. Studies
have shown that mixed fibers can also promote weight loss
through several possible mechanisms including gastric disten-
tion that stimulates cholecystokinin secretion, delayed gastric
emptying and longer ileal transit time. However, the ratio of
slowly to rapidly fermentable fiber types is important
(Kritchevsky, 2001). If rapidly fermentable fibers are included
in the food at high enough levels to promote satiety, adverse
effects such as loose stools and excessive gas may occur (Fahey
et al, 1990). The amount of fiber in the food can be analyzed
several different ways. (See Analyses below.) Because the crude
fiber analysis underestimates fermentable fiber, it does not
accurately represent the total fiber in a pet food. Total dietary
fiber may be a better measure for weight-management foods.
DIARRHEA AND CONSTIPATION
Fiber normalizes intestinal water content, absorbing water in
cases of diarrhea and adding moisture in cases of constipation
(Case 5-1). Moderate amounts of either slowly fermentable or
rapidly fermentable fiber possess this water-modulating fea-
ture. The more fermentable fibers (e.g., gums and soy fibers)
can help pets with diarrhea and constipation by moderating the
water content of the stool, thereby making a watery stool drier
and a dry stool moister.
The binding and gelling properties of fiber also assist in
managing diarrhea because the increased viscosity of the diges-
ta is associated with slower transit and delayed gastric empty-
ing. In constipated pets, fermentable fibers increase stool
weight and moisture content, softening the stool.
Imbalances in the gut flora have been linked to diseases such
as allergies, inflammatory bowel disease and diarrhea. Prebiotic
fibers, in particular, can help restore or maintain a healthy bal-
ance of beneficial bacteria and prevent pathogenic organisms
from increasing and contributing to disease conditions.
DIABETES MELLITUS
Management of diabetes mellitus in people, dogs and cats
includes dietary changes. The glycemic index is a ranking of
carbohydrates based on their effect on blood glucose. Both
slowly and rapidly fermentable fiber types help control blood
glucose levels in diabetic animals (Nelson et al, 1991; NRC
2006). Inclusion of fiber or changing carbohydrate sources can
affect the glycemic index of the food. Clinically, pet foods that
contain cellulose, soybean hulls or peanut hulls minimize
blood glucose fluctuations, which can reduce or eliminate the
need for insulin therapy (Chapter 29). In addition, sorghum
and barley resulted in lower insulinogenic responses than rice
in dogs and cats (Sunvold and Bouchard, 1998; Bouchard and
Sunvold, 2000).
Metabolism
Fiber is enzymatically degraded by intestinal microbes, includ-
ing bacteria, fungi and protozoa but not by intrinsic mucosal
digestive enzymes.These microbes normally reside in the lower
small intestine and large intestine and are referred to as anaer-
obes or facultative anaerobes because they can live without oxy-
gen. They survive by producing energy through fermentation.
Microorganisms colonizing the lower GI tract are similar to
those found in the rumen. The proportion of different bacteri-
al species is related to the type of fermentable substrate avail-
able. Different substrates facilitate the growth of different
species. End products of different substrate and microbial com-
binations result in formation of different levels of short-chain
fatty acids (e.g., acetate or butyrate) and/or the formation of
gases such as hydrogen or methane.
Fermentation is the energy-yielding breakdown of nutrients
such as sugar, starch and fiber in an environment with little or
no oxygen. In this process, microbes only partially use the total
75
Macronutrients
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 75 ---
energy available. Smaller energy-containing compounds (e.g.,
the short-chain fatty acids acetate, propionate and butyrate),
and gases (carbon dioxide, hydrogen and methane) are micro-
bial waste products; however, short-chain fatty acids are valu-
able substrates for the host animal. Microbes contain enzymes
that can break the chemical bonds in different fibers. For exam-
ple, microbial enzymes that digest cellulose are called cellulases
and common pectin-digesting enzymes include pectin esterase
and pectic lyases (Robinson, 1987). Figure 5-14 shows the
major microbial pathways for fermentation of fibers through
pyruvate to short-chain fatty acids.
Fermentation of fiber in the colon affects nitrogen metabo-
lism. Fiber fermentation by bacteria increases bacterial num-
bers. Bacteria use ammonia as a source of nitrogen to build
amino acids, proteins and DNA for reproduction. Small
amounts of urea diffuse from the bloodstream into the colon
where it is hydrolyzed to form ammonia (BNF, 1990;
Mortensen, 1992; Younes et al, 1995).
Prebiotic Fibers, Probiotics and Synbiotics
Prebiotic Fibers 
In addition to the traditional classifications for fiber such as
digestibility, solubility and fermentability, an additional func-
tional classification for fiber has emerged in the last 10 years.
As mentioned above, fibers are classified as “prebiotic fibers,”
which are defined as “non-digestible food ingredients that
selectively stimulate a limited number of bacteria in the colon
to improve host health” (Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995).
Prebiotic fibers are resistant to hydrolysis by enzymes, are able
to support the growth of beneficial bacteria and do not sup-
port the growth of potential pathogens, although some prebi-
otic fibers do support limited growth of some pathogens.
These traditional and new classifications are not mutually
exclusive; prebiotic fibers can have different levels of fer-
mentability or solubility.
A prebiotic is currently known as a selectively fermented
ingredient that allows specific changes in the composition
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
76
Figure 5-14. Pathways of fiber fermentation. Fibers (e.g., cellulose, pectins, hemicelluloses), starches and sugars are metabolized by intes-
tinal microbes through various pathways to a common endpoint of pyruvate. Pyruvate is then further metabolized to yield energy for the
microbe and waste products: short-chain fatty acids (e.g., acetate, propionate, butyrate) and gases (e.g., carbon dioxide, hydrogen and
methane). Short-chain fatty acids are valuable substrates for the host animal that help maintain gastrointestinal tract health.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 76 ---
and/or activity in the GI flora that confers well being and health
benefits to the host (Gibson, 2004). A prebiotic index (PI) may
be used to quantify prebiotic effects in vitro (Palframan et al,
2003). The PI is based on changes in key bacterial groups dur-
ing fermentation of prebiotic fibers with fecal material in batch
cultures and is defined by the following equation:
PI = (Bifidobacteria total) - (Bacteroides total) + (Lactobacillus
total) - (Clostridia total).
The above equation defines the total bacterial count in the
culture. A larger PI indicates that the prebiotic fiber can
increase numbers of beneficial bacterial species (bifidobacteria
and Lactobacillus spp.) at the expense of pathogenic or less
desirable bacterial species (Bacteroides and Clostridium spp.).
The mechanism by which prebiotics are selectively ferment-
ed by specific bacteria is not well understood. Two potential
mechanisms have been proposed: 1) the presence of an exo-gly-
cosidase enables bacteria to metabolize the prebiotic fiber and
2) an uptake mechanism exists on the cell walls of specific bac-
teria for intact oligosaccharides (Rastall et al, 2005).
Prebiotics traditional target beneficial bacteria such as bifi-
dobacteria and Lactobacillus spp. However, the desirable bene-
fits of butyrate production for the colon is recognized increas-
ingly; thus, the potential for targeting non-clostridial butyrate
producers such as gut eubacteria (Rastall et al, 2005). Prebiotic
fibers are also thought to reduce fecal odor by modifying fecal
concentration of metabolites and improve immune function by
influencing gut-associated immune cells.
TYPES OF PREBIOTIC FIBERS
Substances that may have prebiotic activity are mainly
oligosaccharides such as mannanoligosaccharide (MOS), fruc-
tooligosaccharide (FOS), galactooligosaccharide (GOS),
xylooligosaccharide (XOS), isomaltooligosaccharide (IMOS),
soybean oligosaccharides (SOS), pectic oligosaccharides, chi-
tooligosaccharide, lactusucrose and lactulose or other polysac-
charide/oligosaccharide-containing sources such as inulin, RS
and arabinogalactans (Floch and Hong-Curtiss, 2002;Topping
et al, 2003; Gibson et al, 2005). Many of these prebiotics, par-
ticularly oligosaccharides, occur naturally in foods such as arti-
chokes, onions, bananas, wheat bran and chicory (Hussein et al,
1998). Oligosaccharides are polymers that contain up to nine
sugars. Using the PI (Palframan et al, 2003), lactulose, IMOS,
SOS and GOS provide significantly better prebiotic activity
than FOS. An in vitro fermentation study comparing different
oligosaccharides showed that XOS and lactulose produced the
largest increase in bifidobacteria, whereas GOS produced the
largest decrease in clostridia (Rycroft et al, 2001). All the pre-
biotics tested, including FOS, inulin, IMOS and SOS,
increased bifidobacteria and most decreased clostridia.
Although these studies show that many prebiotics are poten-
tially useful, more feeding studies need to prove their utility in
vivo. FOS is the most extensively studied prebiotic and has
been shown to stimulate growth of bifidobacteria in in vivo and
in vitro studies. In the colon, bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus
spp. readily ferment FOS, which enhances bacterial growth rate
(Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995; Roberfroid et al, 1993; Hidaka
et al, 1986; Bunce et al, 1995). Increased numbers of these bac-
terial species may benefit the overall health of people and other
animals, including pigs, rabbits and rats (Bunce et al, 1995;
Willard et al, 1994; Howard et al, 1995; Buddington et al,
2002).
Data from canine feeding studies, however, are sparse and
results have been mixed. Some studies showed trends towards
increased bifidobacteria with FOS supplementation whereas
others showed no response (Swanson, 2002, 2002a; Flickinger,
2000; Strickling et al, 2000). In a study using chicory (a source
of inulin), there were no significant differences in the level of
fecal bifidobacteria when dogs were fed dry, extruded food
made with either 3% chicory (a non-digestible oligosaccharide)
or 3% glucose, although there was a significant increase in
clostridial numbers when foods with higher protein level were
fed (Zentek et al, 2003).
There are even fewer feline studies and not much informa-
tion is available currently. Arabinogalactan, another prebiotic
polysaccharide from the Western larch tree, increased lacto-
bacilli in dogs (Grieshop et al, 2002). Although studies in peo-
ple and other species (e.g., rats and pigs) showed that prebiotics
benefit GI health by promoting a healthy gut flora, it is evident
that there is much that needs to be determined about the effi-
cacy of different prebiotics in dogs and cats and the appropri-
ate doses. Prebiotic doses that have been tested with no delete-
rious effects range from 0.5 to 3 g/day and 0.5 to 2% of the food
on a DM basis. New and emerging prebiotics that still need to
be studied in companion animals include GOS, IMOS, SOS
and XOS. In addition, it would be advantageous to combine
the effect of prebiotic fibers and the appropriate traditional
function of fibers to obtain the best combination for improving
gut flora and stool characteristics.
GUT MICROFLORA
Many studies have emerged recently about the importance of
gut flora to GI health in particular and immune function health
in general. The gut flora and mucosa act as barriers against
invasion by gut pathogens.The gut flora also plays a significant
role in modifying metabolic end products of food, detoxifying
toxins in the body and competing for nutrients and coloniza-
77
Macronutrients
Table 5-7. Probiotic benefits and potential mechanisms.
Benefit
Proposed mechanism
Anti-allergy
Modulation of the cytokine profile
Anticarcinogenic
Metabolism and deactivation of 
carcinogens
Anti-diarrheal
Immunomodulation/stimulation of GI 
immune system, competitive exclusion, 
production of antimicrobials
Antiinflammatory
Stimulation of the antiinflammatory 
cytokine IL10
Cholesterol synthesis Hydrolysis of bile salts, increased 
fermentation of end products
Immunomodulation
Stimulation of the Th1 cytokine profile to 
down regulate allergic responses
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 77 ---
tion sites with pathogens (Gibson et al, 2005). Imbalances in
the gut flora have been linked to diseases such as allergy,
inflammatory bowel disease and diarrhea. Theoretically, when
normal tolerance to the gut flora is disrupted, an altered
response may occur in the intestinal immune system, which
may initiate and maintain inflammatory bowel disease or trig-
ger the development of allergic responses (Fedorak and
Madsen, 2004; Macfarlane et al, 2005). Also, many pathogens
in the GI tract, including C. perfringens, C. difficile, Salmonella
spp. and Escherichia coli cause diarrhea (Marks and Kather,
2003). According to human and veterinary literature, the gut
flora changes with age (Buddington, 2003; Benno et al, 1992;
Reuter, 2001). Molecular techniques currently available for
microbial characterization such as fluorescent in situ hybridiza-
tion and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) can
be used to identify major groups of bacteria. Using DGGE,
investigators identified Bacteroides spp., fusobacteria, lactobacil-
li and streptococci in the canine GI tract (Simpson et al, 2002).
Although not quite as abundant, bifidobacteria are thought to
be important for GI health. Bifidobacteria produce short-chain
fatty acids that decrease intestinal pH and inhibit growth of
pathogenic bacteria. Bifidobacteria are also thought to produce
antibacterial substances that are active against clostridia, E. coli
and other pathogenic bacteria. Studies have shown that bifi-
dobacteria are found at higher levels in breast fed babies (Hoy
et al, 1990) and are found at lower levels in patients with ulcer-
ative colitis (Macfarlane et al, 2005). In young puppies, bacter-
ial populations in the GI tract establish gradually, and can be
influenced by diet and environment. Changes in the types and
proportions of bacteria in puppies can influence their resistance
to diseases. Total bacterial numbers in older dogs were lower
than in younger dogs, whereas numbers of putative pathogens
such as C. perfringens were higher (Benno et al, 1992).
Furthermore, widespread use of antibiotics can lead to addi-
tional perturbations of the gut flora, especially in the compro-
mised GI tracts of young and older animals. Therefore, prebi-
otic fibers, which support the growth of bifidobacteria, should
confer benefits to the health of the host. Feeding probiotics is
another approach to modulating gut flora.
Probiotics
Probiotics are live or viable bacterial cell preparations that have
beneficial effects on the health of the host when administered
in adequate amounts. Levels of 1 x 108 to 1 x 1011 colony form-
ing units (cfu)/day have been tested and determined to be a
desirable inclusion range although more research needs to be
done. Probiotics should be nonpathogenic and resist stomach
acid and bile. Some probiotics adhere to intestinal epithelial tis-
sue and colonize the intestinal tract; adherence but not colo-
nization may be necessary for some beneficial effects.The abil-
ity to adhere to the intestine depends on the bacterial strain
rather than the host species. When administered in adequate
amounts various strains of lactobacilli of human and canine ori-
gin were able to adhere to human, canine, emu, ostrich and
rainbow trout intestinal or fecal mucus with no host species
specific adhesion (Rinkinen et al, 2003).There was a clear trend
suggesting that adhesion depended on the microorganism.
Various bacteria possessing some of these attributes have been
identified for potential use as probiotics, including bifidobacte-
ria, Saccharomyces spp. and lactobacilli.
Table 5-7 summarizes the benefits attributed to probiotics
and their potential mechanisms (Teitelbaum and Walker, 2002).
There is much literature with varying results about feeding
probiotics to people and other non-human animals for GI
health, immune health, diarrhea, inflammatory conditions,
allergic conditions, cancer and many other disorders. As with
prebiotics, many studies have not used dogs and cats. Four
studies in dogs that examined four different microorganisms
(fed between 1 x 108 to 1 x 109 cfu/day): Lactobacillus GG,
Enterococcus faecium, Lactobacillus acidophilus DSM 13241 and
Bacillus CIP 5832, gave mostly neutral results (Benyacoub et al,
2003; Baillon et al, 2004; Biourge et al, 1998; Westermarck et
al, 2005). E. faecium was the most promising organism studied;
this organism improved circulating specific anti-canine distem-
per virus IgG (Benyacoub et al, 2003). However, use of
Enterococcus as a probiotic must be evaluated cautiously because
it was shown to significantly enhance adhesion of C. jejuni to
the canine intestine in in vitro adhesion studies, making it a
potential risk factor for infection and carriage (Rinkinen et al,
2003a). Many stability challenges exist for incorporating probi-
otics into pet food (Weese and Arroyo, 2003). In this study,
evaluation of 19 canine and feline products claiming to contain
probiotics, no product contained all the listed organisms, 11
products contained additional organisms and five products did
not have any relevant growth when tested.
Synbiotics
Feeding synbiotics is a third approach to modifying gut flora. A
synbiotic is “a mixture of probiotics and prebiotics that benefi-
cially affects the host by improving the survival and implanta-
tion of live microbial dietary supplements in the GI tract”
(Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995). The simplest approach
includes feeding a probiotic and a prebiotic together in a food,
preferably a prebiotic that can be metabolized by the probiotic,
with the objective of obtaining synergistic effects. A study using
this approach failed to yield significant synergistic effects
(Swanson et al, 2002a). Another more targeted approach is to
design a synbiotic using a probiotic and a prebiotic specifically
used by the probiotic, preferably to produce an antimicrobial
substance (Rabiu et al, 2001).This concept is still in its infancy
and will require more research.
FIBER INTERACTIONS WITH 
NUTRIENT DIGESTIBILITY AND 
AVAILABILITY
The amount and type of fiber in a pet food have the greatest
overall effect on digestibility of all nutrients. In general, foods
containing slowly fermentable fiber sources have lower overall
DM digestibility than foods without fiber or those containing
rapidly fermentable fiber sources. Also, as the level of fiber in
the food increases, the DM digestibility of the food decreases.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
78
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 78 ---
Apparent and true digestibility of fats, starch and energy are
unaffected by the type and amount of fiber in foods (Silvio et
al, 1996; Muir et al, 1996).
Apparent digestibility of protein is lower in foods contain-
ing fiber because of increased nitrogen in feces from the
increased fecal biomass. Research using ileal-cannulated dogs
has shown that true digestibility of protein is unaffected by
dietary fiber type or content (Silvio et al, 1996; Muir et al,
1996). However, a study that evaluated varying levels of cellu-
lose and pectin at 10% total dietary fiber (100% cellulose, 66%
cellulose/34% pectin, 66% pectin/34% cellulose and 100%
pectin) showed that total crude protein digestibility decreased
with increasing pectin levels (Silvio et al, 2000).The discrep-
ancy between the results obtained with total tract apparent
digestibility and true digestibility can be explained by taking
into account fermentation in the colon. One of the assump-
tions when calculating digestibility across the entire GI tract is
that all fecal material is of dietary origin. Fermentation of
nutrients that pass into the large intestine, however, results in
significant amounts of bacterial protein in the feces. Bacterial
protein is then confounded with undigested dietary protein
resulting in lower apparent digestibility. Therefore, it is best to
use true protein digestibility to obtain an unbiased evaluation
of pet foods containing fiber. When evaluating protein
digestibility data, it is essential that the fiber content of the
food be known, and care must be taken when interpreting and
comparing results among foods.
The main excretory product of fiber digestion is additional
bacterial protein in the feces. It is typically analyzed as addi-
tional fecal nitrogen content and can confound protein
digestibility measurements made using total fecal collections.
Intestinal fermentation of fiber accounts for hydrogen,methane
and other gases in expired breath. Some short-chain fatty acids
are excreted in the stool.
Fiber affects mineral availability (BNF, 1990). Some fiber
types reduce and others enhance mineral absorption and use
(Table 5-8). It is not clear what factors in fiber are responsible
for the effects on mineral availability. Water-holding capacity,
viscosity, cation exchange capacity, particle size, tannin content,
oxalate content and presence of phytates, uronic acid and phe-
nolic groups are among the properties of fibers that have been
evaluated to predict effects on mineral availability (BNF, 1990;
Robinson, 1987; Southgate, 1987). Unfortunately, a direct rela-
tionship appears not to exist between these physiochemical
properties measured on fibers in vitro and mineral availability
measured in vivo. This disparity reflects the complex nature of
the absorption processes within the intestine and interactions
that occur with other food components.
Analyses
The fiber content of pet foods or ingredients can be measured
by several different laboratory methods; the most common is
the crude fiber method (Figure 5-12). In the United States,
regulations require that the maximum amount of crude fiber be
listed on the label of all pet foods (Chapter 9). Determination
of crude fiber adequately represents total fiber in a pet food
when most of the fiber is slowly fermentable; however, the
analysis excludes the more rapidly fermentable pectins and
gums. Because the crude fiber analysis underestimates fer-
mentable fiber, it does not accurately represent the total fiber in
a pet food.
Fiber can also be measured by the total dietary fiber method
(Prosky et al, 1984) (Figure 5-12). This analysis is used to
determine total fiber and is commonly used for measuring
fiber content of human foods. In the total dietary fiber
method, lipids are first extracted with ethanol and then the
sample is digested with α-amylases to convert readily
digestible starches to soluble sugars. All the water-soluble
components (sugars, degraded starch, pectin, gums and most
of the hemicellulose) are separated from the water-insoluble
components or insoluble fibers (cellulose, lignin and a small
fraction of hemicelluloses). The water-soluble components are
further extracted with ethanol to remove the sugars and
degraded starch. The residue that remains is termed soluble
fiber, which includes pectins and gums.
The Van Soest fiber analysis system was developed as an
improvement to the crude fiber method (1963). The Van Soest
analysis uses detergents to more accurately estimate the differ-
ent types of fiber and fractionate them into relatively digestible
and indigestible fractions (Figure 5-12). Neutral detergent fiber
(NDF) is the residue remaining after samples are boiled in a
solution containing neutral pH detergent and EDTA. The
residue that remains is mostly plant cell walls including hemicel-
79
Macronutrients
Table 5-8. Mineral availability as affected by different fiber 
sources fed at 5% total dietary fiber.*
Fiber 
Zinc
Calcium
Iron  
Phosphorus  
source
(%)**
(%)**
(%)***
(%)†
Apple pectin
ND
ND
55a
75
Beet pulp
24a
44a
29a
67a
Cellulose
88
100
100
100
Citrus pulp cells
ND
ND
49a
75
Corn bran
94
92
100
ND
Guar gum
ND
ND
100
35a
Gum arabic
ND
ND
81
100
Pea fiber
41
58a
ND
ND
Peanut hulls
30a
100
67
58a
Soy cotyledon fiber
ND
ND
86
66a
Soy hulls
78
100
ND
64a
Sunflower hulls
54
100
100
ND
Wheat middlings
70
100
51a
ND
Key: ND = not determined.
*Availability (%) of the mineral in a food with 5% iso-total dietary
fiber relative to the same food with no fiber.
**Adapted from Wedekind K, Walker L, Hancock J, et al.
Bioavailability of zinc and calcium is affected by certain fiber
sources. Federation of American Societies for Experimental
Biology Journal 1995; 9: A450.
***Adapted from Wedekind K, Walker L, Beyer S, et al.
Bioavailability of iron is affected by certain fiber sources in
chicks and puppies. Ninth International Symposium on Trace
Elements in Man and Animals (TEMA-9) 1996; A20.
†Adapted from Wedekind K, Beyer S, Titgemeyer E. Bioavailability
of phosphorus is affected by certain fiber sources. Federation of
American Societies for Experimental Biology Journal 1996; 10:
A524.
aWithin the same mineral, a superscript “a” indicates significant
reductions (p <0.10) relative to the no-fiber standard.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 79 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
80
NUTRITIONAL ESSENTIALITY
Nutritional essentiality describes those factors in the external
chemical environments of organisms specifically required for nor-
mal physiologic functions. At least 40 such factors (e.g., vitamins,
minerals, amino acids, fatty acids, water) are generally considered
to be nutritionally essential. Foods are considered nutritionally
“adequate” if they contain amounts of each of these essential nutri-
ents that meet or exceed known needs.
The science of nutrition has functioned for a century under the
nutritional essentiality paradigm that holds nutrients are essential
to prevent ill health in very specific ways. Specific prevention of
nutrient deficiency diseases has been used to define nutrient
essentiality and establish dietary recommendations. Indeed, unless
a clinical disease has been related specifically to the deprivation of
a certain nutrient, then that nutrient has not been considered
“essential.”
Investigators have been able to estimate nutrient requirements
quantitatively based on the specific deficiency disease connotation of
the nutritional essentiality paradigm. The term “required” is general-
ly used in reference to the lowest intake that prevents disease. Such
minimum requirements, while seemingly physiologically relevant, are
difficult to define or measure with any reasonable precision due to
inter-individual variation, which is also difficult to estimate.
Reference levels of intake (“adequate levels”) are set to exceed
such minimums, and thus to have acceptably low risk of deficien-
cy. Because risk is the probability of events occurring within popu-
lations, allowances relate to populations with their characteristic
food habits and inherent inter-individual variations in minimum
requirements. Thus, the recommended dietary allowances (RDAs)
and the reference (recommended) dietary intakes (RDIs) are implic-
itly intended to relate to the United States population (human) just
as the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) Dog
Food and Cat Food Nutrient Profiles relate to pet populations.
CONDITIONALLY ESSENTIAL?
The nutritional essentiality paradigm does not pertain to cases in
which nutrient needs of an individual or minority subgroup differ
markedly from those of the general population. Under certain condi-
tions, a dietary source of a “nonessential” nutrient can be needed to
prevent physiologic dysfunction. For example, glutamine can reduce
nitrogen loss and infection rate of bone marrow transplant patients.
Carnitine can improve weight gain and nitrogen balance of parenter-
ally fed infants, and helps maintain lean muscle mass in animals
undergoing weight loss. The nutritional roles of these nutrients are
simply not addressed by the nutritional essentiality paradigm.
NONSPECIFIC EFFECTS?
The specific deficiency disease connotation of the nutritional essen-
tiality paradigm has become a growing problem in dealing with
issues of diet and health.This is because the paradigm does not per-
tain to functions of nutrients that are either nonspecific or nontradi-
tional (i.e., outside the known functions of nutrients). Such functions
have been suggested by recent epidemiology, which has produced
evidence linking the consumption of several nutrients (e.g., high
intakes of vitamin A-containing foods, relatively high intakes or high
plasma levels of vitamin E and supranutritional dietary supplements
of selenium) with reduced risks of chronic diseases.
In these cases, nutrient effects do not appear to have the speci-
ficity connoted by the nutritional essentiality paradigm. For exam-
ple, the complementary natures of the antioxidant functions of vita-
min E, vitamin C and selenium suggest that any one “spares” the
need for the others in protecting against lipid peroxidation. Thus,
the antioxidant nutrients appear to be risk modifiers of disease
rather than primary agents in their etiologies.
ARE NON-NUTRIENTS REQUIRED?
The nutritional essentiality paradigm relates only to nutrients (i.e.,
dietary factors that are absorbed and function in normal host
metabolism). Yet, it has become evident that some such non-nutri-
ents (e.g., fiber) can positively affect health through functions that
are technically external to the body. Several positive physiologic
responses have been associated with the consumption of isolated
fiber fractions or fiber-containing foods. Epidemiology has revealed
associations of fiber-rich diets with reduced risks of cancer, coro-
nary heart disease, diabetes mellitus, diverticulosis, hypertension
and gallstone formation in people. Yet, under the nutritional essen-
tiality paradigm, these effects are not easily described.
NEW PARADIGM
A new paradigm for nutrition is emerging out of the limitations of
the essentiality paradigm. It takes an individualized view of organ-
isms. It recognizes both endogenous and exogenous conditions as
determinants of the dietary needs for definable health outcomes.
These outcomes are not necessarily specifically associated with
single nutrients. It recognizes these factors as nutrients if their
activities benefit the metabolism and/or gastrointestinal function of
the host. It recognizes various outcomes as appropriate for various
individuals, both within a species/population, as well as between
species.
Freedom from overt physiologic dysfunction and reduced risk of
chronic diseases have become important outcomes in human and
pet nutrition. Nutritional needs will be based on individual genetic
and metabolic characteristics to the end that foods can be pre-
scribed on an individual basis.
Its having become rather elastic in its application indicates that
the nutritional essentiality paradigm has been outgrown: Nutrients
have come to be described as being required/essential for particu-
lar functions. Some are called dispensable/indispensable under
certain conditions. Several are recognized as beneficial at levels
greater than may be required.
Outgrowth of the old paradigm is occurring at an increasing pace
with the development of the modern field of molecular biology. It is
now clear that some nutrients function as gene regulators and that
genetic bases can predispose to disease. The time is quickly
approaching when it will be possible to identify disease predisposi-
tion, metabolic characteristics and specific dietary needs individu-
ally. Then, the population-based paradigm will be defunct and a
new way of thinking about dietary needs will emerge.
*Excerpted from an article originally published by PetFood Industry
in July/August 1998, pages 31-43.
Box 5-7. Adequate vs. Optimal Nutrient Intake.*
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 80 ---
lulose, cellulose and lignin; however, the pectins are lost. Acid
detergent fiber (ADF) is determined by boiling the analytical
sample in an acidic detergent solution. The fraction remaining
contains cellulose and lignin. The result of subtracting the
amounts of ADF and NDF in a particular food or ingredient
approximates the hemicellulose content. Like the limitations of
crude fiber determinations, NDF and ADF do not measure the
more soluble fiber fractions of pectins and gums; therefore, they
are not widely used to determine fiber in pet foods.
Requirements
Fiber is not considered essential in the diets of cats and dogs,
although it is often included in commercial foods. Overall, dogs
and cats do not derive much energy from absorbing the typical
end products of bacterial fermentation; however, short-chain
fatty acids are important in maintaining colonic health.
Therefore, a small amount of fiber (<5%) that contains both
rapidly and slowly fermentable fibers is recommended in foods
for healthy pets (Chapters 13 and 20). Today, much interest
exists in human and veterinary nutrition about the role of
“pharmacologic doses” of certain nutrients (e.g., fiber) in pre-
venting chronic diseases (Box 5-7).
Fiber also aids in managing diseases such as obesity, diabetes
mellitus, diarrhea, colitis and constipation. The types and
amounts of dietary fiber required to assist in the management of
these diseases can be found in Chapters 27, 29, 56, 62 and 64.
Deficiencies
Total deficiency of fiber in typical pet foods is not a practical
problem because many ingredients contain some fiber.
Homemade foods, veterinary therapeutic foods made with
more refined ingredients and purified diets used in research
studies can be extremely low in fiber. Some dietary fiber that
produces short-chain fatty acids is usually recommended.
Excess/Toxicity
Excess fiber may have undesirable effects. For instance, certain
fiber types decrease mineral absorption. The effects on mineral
absorption vary by type of fiber and the mineral. More rapidly
fermentable fibers (e.g., pectins and guar gum) appear to
decrease availability of some minerals, whereas fibers that con-
tain more cellulose have little effect on mineral absorption.
Excess fiber can dilute the energy and nutrient content of the
food to such an extent that an animal may have difficulty eat-
ing enough of the food to meet its needs. Controlled levels of
fiber are advantageous in weight-reducing foods for dogs and
cats; however, such foods are fortified so that only total energy
intake is low and other nutrients are present in adequate
amounts to meet daily requirements.
Sources
The maximum crude fiber content of pet foods must be listed in
the guaranteed analysis section of pet food labels in the United
States. Most dog and cat foods have DM crude fiber contents
of less than 5%. The fiber in most pet foods comes from a vari-
ety of ingredients. Grains such as whole corn and brown rice are
sources of fiber in dry extruded foods. Some pet foods contain
specific ingredients added to provide fiber. Fiber sources com-
monly used in pet foods today include the hulls from rice, soy-
beans, peanuts and oats,dried beet pulp, various vegetable gums,
corn bran, wheat bran, rice bran, oat bran and more purified
fiber sources such as oligosaccharides, cellulose and soy fiber.
AAFCO publishes official definitions of fiber ingredients
(2007). Table 5-9 lists common fiber ingredients with fiber con-
tent and general classifications of solubility and fermentability.
PROTEIN/AMINO ACIDS
Definition
Proteins are large, complex molecules composed of hundreds to
thousands of amino acids. Amino acids are composed of car-
bon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and sometimes sulfur and
phosphorus. Four chemical groups covalently bonded to a car-
bon atom form the general structure of amino acids. The four
groups include a hydrogen atom, a carboxyl group (COOH),
an α-amino group (NH2) and another chemical group specif-
ic for each amino acid (Table 5-10). Although hundreds of
amino acids exist in nature, only 20 are commonly found as
protein components. The amino acids found in mammalian
proteins are the L-isomer of α-amino acids, which means the
side chain unique to each amino acid is linked to the α-carbon
atom in the L (levorotatory) position.
Structure
Proteins are linear polymers of amino acids in which the amino
group of one amino acid and the carboxyl group of another
amino acid are coupled together (peptide bond) (Figure 5-15).
Amino acids arranged in chains are referred to as peptides.Two
bonded amino acids form a dipeptide, three a tripeptide and
more than three a polypeptide.
Proteins can be described as having a primary, secondary, ter-
tiary or quaternary structure. The primary structure of proteins
refers to the sequence (order) of amino acids along the polypep-
tide chain. The secondary structure of proteins refers to the
81
Macronutrients
Table 5-9. Characteristics of selected fiber ingredients.
Crude  
Total  
Fiber 
fiber
dietary
Solubility
Fermentability
ingredient
(%)*
fiber (%)*
in water
rate
Apple pectin
0
95
Soluble
Rapid
Beet pulp
20
66
Insoluble
Moderate
Cellulose
80
98
Insoluble
Slow
Citrus pulp
12
77
Soluble
Rapid
Corn bran
19
90
Insoluble
Moderate
Guar gum
0
81
Soluble
Rapid
Gum arabic
0
91
Soluble
Rapid
Pea fiber
30
92
Insoluble
Moderate
Peanut hulls
57
76
Insoluble
Slow
Rice bran
44
13
Insoluble
Moderate
Soy fiber
20
83
Soluble
Rapid
Soy hulls
34
69
Insoluble
Moderate/slow
Sunflower hulls
54
80
Insoluble
Slow
Wheat bran
10
43
Insoluble
Moderate
Wheat middlings
7
46
Insoluble
Moderate
*As is basis.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 81 ---
configuration of the polypeptide chains resulting from hydro-
gen bonds between adjacent amino acids. Alpha-helices, β-
pleated sheets or random coils are formed by these hydrogen
bonds. The tertiary structure describes how further interac-
tions of the amino acids cause folding and bending of the
polypeptide chain giving the protein its biologic activity.
Proteins have a quaternary structure if they contain more than
one polypeptide chain. Hydrogen, electrostatic and ionic
bonds form between the polypeptide chains and stabilize the
aggregates. The primary structure of proteins is responsible
for the secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures that are
formed.
Other compounds bound to peptides may also classify pro-
teins. Simple proteins are made up of only amino acids. Simple
proteins are subclassified into fibrous or globular proteins
according to shape, solubility and chemical composition.
Fibrous proteins include collagens, elastins and keratins, which
are the major structural proteins in the body. Collagens are the
main proteins of connective tissues and make up about 30% of
the total proteins in the body. Elastin is the protein found in
tendons and arteries. Keratins are the main proteins in hair. All
enzymes, hormones and antibodies that are proteins have a
globular structure. Subgroups of globular proteins include the
albumins, histones, globulins and protamines.
Conjugated proteins contain amino acids and carbohy-
drates (glycoproteins), lipids (lipoproteins) or minerals (phos-
phoproteins, chromoproteins). Glycoproteins are commonly
found as components of cell membranes and function to
modulate enzymes, receptors and immune function and to
recognize cells (antigen and blood types). Glycoproteins are
also components of mucous secretions that act as lubricants in
many parts of the body, myelin that surrounds nervous tissue
and as part of lipoproteins. Lipoproteins transport lipids in
the bloodstream in a water-miscible form to tissues.
Lipoproteins are typically classified into four main categories
according to their density: 1) chylomicrons, 2) very low-den-
sity lipoproteins (VLDL), 3) LDL and 4) high-density
lipoproteins (HDL) (Chapter 28). Proteins that contain min-
erals include hemoglobin (iron), cytochromes (copper) and
caseins (phosphorus).
Some proteins in the body contain special amino acids that
are derived from common amino acids. Collagen contains
hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine, which are derivatives of pro-
line and lysine, respectively.Triiodothyronine and tetraiodothy-
ronine (thyroxine) are derived from tyrosine and function as
hormones and part of the protein thyroglobulin. Gamma-car-
boxyglutamic acid is derived from glutamic acid and is key for
the function of calcium binding in thrombin, which functions
in blood clotting. Other amino acids such as taurine (a β-amino
acid) and γ-aminobutyric acid function in specific roles in the
body, but are not found as part of proteins.
Purines (adenine and guanine) and pyrimidines (cytosine,
thymine, uracil) are other nitrogen-containing molecules that
form nucleic acids. Nucleic acids (RNA and DNA) carry the
genetic information that codes for the primary structure of pro-
teins (the amino acid sequence).
Function
Proteins are the principal structural constituents of body organs
and tissues including: 1) collagen and elastin found in cartilage,
tendons and ligaments, 2) the contractile proteins actin and
myosin in muscles, 3) keratin proteins in skin, hair and nails
and 4) blood proteins including hemoglobin, transferrin, albu-
min and globulin. Proteins also function as enzymes, hormones
(e.g., insulin) and antibodies. Amino acids can serve as a source
of energy after the nitrogen-containing amino group is
removed by deamination or transamination.
Importance of Amino Acids
Several amino acids are classified as essential or indispensable
(10 for dogs and 11 for cats).These amino acids cannot be syn-
thesized by the body in sufficient quantities and therefore must
be supplied by food. The carbon skeletons of these essential
amino acids are the critical component that the body cannot
synthesize. Many of the remaining amino acids are nonessen-
tial or dispensable; they can be synthesized in the body from
carbon and nitrogen building blocks and need not be present in
the food if adequate nitrogen and energy are available. Some
amino acids are conditionally essential.These amino acids ordi-
narily are not required in the food except during certain physi-
ologic or pathologic conditions when they may not be synthe-
sized in adequate quantities.
Although nonessential amino acids can be made from pre-
cursor carbon skeletons, they are just as critical to the makeup
of proteins and are just as essential for metabolic reactions in
the body as essential amino acids. Protein is also necessary to
provide the body with a source of nitrogen for synthesis of other
nitrogen-containing compounds including purines, pyrim-
idines, nucleotides, nucleic acids, creatinine, nitric oxide and
some neurotransmitters.
Metabolism
Digestion and Absorption
Dietary proteins must be digested to be absorbed from the GI
tract. Protein digestion begins in the stomach with the action
of the enzyme pepsin in the presence of hydrochloric acid.The
main end products of gastric protein digestion are mixtures of
large polypeptides; however, little or no absorption of these
molecules occurs. In the small intestine, the pancreas and cells
lining the small intestine secrete other enzymes (endopeptidas-
es and exopeptidases).These enzymes break the bonds between
the amino acids of large polypeptides resulting in free amino
acids, dipeptides and tripeptides that can be absorbed across the
intestinal wall (Mathews, 1991). Some proteins are less readily
digested than others. The rapidity of digestion is influenced by
many factors, including protein structure, processing effects,
other nutrients in the meal and the presence of enzyme
inhibitory factors.
Absorption of amino acids is a sodium-dependent, active-
transport process that requires energy (ATP). This process is
mediated by four different carrier systems that transport neutral
amino acids, basic amino acids, dicarboxylic amino acids and
imino acids. These separate carrier systems help ensure trans-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
82
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 82 ---
83
Macronutrients
Table 5-10. Amino acids. 
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 83 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
84
Table 5-10. Amino acids (continued). 
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 84 ---
port of a well balanced mixture of amino acids from the intes-
tinal lumen to the portal vein.
Amino acids and proteins not absorbed in the small intestine
can be fermented in the hindgut and produce fecal odor com-
pounds. These compounds are produced by bacterial enzymes
during the degradation of endogenous and undigested food
proteins.The fecal odor compounds include ammonia, aliphat-
ic amines, indoles, phenols and volatile sulfur-containing com-
pounds. These compounds not only affect fecal odors but can
also seriously affect the GI health of animals (Hussein and
Sunvold, 2000). The amount of dietary amino acids that reach
the large intestine can alter fecal compounds. The amount of
amino acids reaching the large intestine can be affected by high
food DM intake, high protein foods and foods that contain low
quality proteins. An increase in protein and amino acid flow to
the large intestine can result in more substrate for the resident
bacteria and an increase in fecal odor components (Yamka et al,
2006; Hussein and Sunvold, 2000).
Many studies investigating altering fecal odor compounds
have focused on the use of prebiotics. Researchers found that
feeding adult dogs FOS (0.5% of the DM) decreased
putrescine, cadaverine, tyramine and total amines (Hussein
and Sunvold, 2000). This study demonstrated that fecal odor
could be manipulated by prebiotics; however, few studies have
focused on fecal components related to protein source.
Another study found that dogs consuming poultry by-prod-
uct meal produced more fecal odor compounds than dogs fed
soy-based foods (Yamka et al, 2006). The reduction of fecal
odor compounds in soy-fed dogs was likely the result of
hindgut fermentation of soluble fiber and oligosaccharides
present in soy.
Apparent vs.True Digestibility
Estimations of crude protein and amino acid availabilities of
most feed ingredients can be provided by determining appar-
ent ileal protein and amino acid digestibilites. Apparent
digestibilities are determined by comparing the amounts of
amino acids present in the feed and digesta without determin-
ing endogenous nitrogen losses. For determining true ileal
amino acid digestibilities, undigested dietary amino acids pres-
ent in the ileal digesta should be differentiated from endoge-
nous amino acids. Recent studies suggest that endogenous
nitrogen losses are higher than previously estimated and that
differences in apparent digestibilities between feedstuffs are
attributed to differences in endogenous gut nitrogen losses
rather than differences in true digestibilities (Nyachoti et al,
1997). Factors such as body weight, dietary fiber content, DM
intake and the presence of anti-nutritive factors in the diet
influence secretions and/or reabsorption of endogenous gut
protein (Nyachoti et al, 1997).
Several methods exist for estimating the contribution of
endogenous protein and amino acids at the distal ileum; three
are used most commonly. The first method is a direct method
for measuring endogenous protein. This method requires that
animals be fed a protein-free diet. It is assumed that the recov-
ery of endogenous protein and amino acids at the distal ileum
is the same for animals fed protein-free and protein-containing
diets (Nissen, 1992; Burns et al, 1982; Kendall et al, 1982).The
second method is the regression method. The regression
method determines endogenous protein and amino acid recov-
eries in digesta with the aid of regression to zero protein intake
using a series of test source protein levels. However, with the
regression method, no relationship is assumed between protein
85
Macronutrients
Figure 5-15. Protein structure (A) and formation of peptide bonds (B). The dotted lines show how the peptide bonds are formed, with the
production of water. R = the remainder of amino acids. For example, in glycine, R = (CH2)2–COOH.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 85 ---
intake and the recovery of endogenous protein and amino acids
(Nissen, 1992).The third method for determining the recovery
of endogenous protein is the 15N-isotope dilution technique.
The endogenous protein is labeled, secreted into the GI tract
via a continuous infusion of 15N-leucine. This method directly
measures the contribution of endogenous to total protein
recovered at the distal ileum in animals fed protein-containing
foods (Grala et al, 1998; Nissen, 1992).
True, rather than apparent, ileal amino acid digestibilities
should be used when formulating diets, but this requires further
development of methods for routine estimation of endogenous
nitrogen losses. Improvements in protein usage should be
sought via reducing endogenous nitrogen losses and improving
true ileal amino acid digestibilites (Nyachoti et al, 1997).
Protein Usage
Absorbed amino acids and small di- and tripeptides are
reassembled into “new” proteins by the liver and other tissues of
the body. Amino acids from food are transported from the liver
to other tissues by serum albumin or as free amino acids. The
fate of amino acids after absorption falls into three general cat-
egories: 1) tissue protein synthesis, especially in muscles and
liver, 2) synthesis of enzymes, albumin, hormones and other
nitrogen-containing compounds and 3) deamination and use of
the remaining carbon skeletons for energy.
A high rate of protein synthesis occurs in production of red
and white blood cells, epithelial cells of the skin and those lin-
ing the GI tract (i.e., intestinal mucosa, which produces
exocrine secretions, such as digestive enzymes and mucus) and
the pancreas. In addition, all body proteins are continuously
broken down and resynthesized, a process known as protein
turnover. Some proteins (muscle proteins and some plasma
proteins such as albumin) have a relatively long lifetime (days
to weeks). Other proteins (cytokines and enzymes) have rela-
tively short lives (minutes to hours).
Muscle protein composes nearly 50% of total body protein,
but only accounts for 30% of new protein synthesized, whereas
visceral and organ proteins compose a smaller portion of total
body protein but account for 50% of new proteins synthesized.
Because protein turnover is the sum total of the continuous
degradation and synthesis cycles of specific proteins, a measure
of protein turnover is only a “snapshot” in time of protein
metabolism. In addition, rates of protein synthesis and degra-
dation for any particular protein can change under different
physiologic conditions.
The body is able to synthesize new proteins and enzymes
provided all the necessary amino acids are available. The
source of amino acids is not important. Cells use amino acids
from a variety of sources including those derived from food
proteins, single amino acids added to the food and amino
acids synthesized by the body. In addition, cells synthesizing
new protein cannot distinguish between amino acids from
grains (e.g., corn and rice) and those from meats (e.g., chick-
en and beef). The only criterion is that all the amino acids
needed to synthesize a particular protein be present in suffi-
cient quantities when necessary. Protein synthesis will be lim-
ited when certain amino acids are not present or available in
the quantities needed.
During protein turnover, a fraction of amino acids enter
catabolic pathways that lead to their permanent loss. The
amount of nitrogen lost every day as a result of the body’s con-
tinuous breakdown process is called obligatory nitrogen loss.
Dietary protein must be consumed each day to replace amino
acids lost to catabolism. Trauma, infection, severe sepsis and
burns increase protein turnover and nitrogen losses, whereas
nitrogen losses are reduced during long-term fasting and star-
vation. Nitrogen is normally lost from the body in feces
(nitrogen, proteins, cells), in urine and through skin desqua-
mation and loss of hair.
Nitrogen balance is the net difference between nitrogen con-
sumed and lost; however, the determination is fraught with
technical difficulties. Most commonly, nitrogen losses are
underestimated through incomplete collection of feces, urine,
hair and sloughed cutaneous cells; whereas, nitrogen intake is
routinely overestimated. Thus, nitrogen balance should only be
regarded as a crude estimate of body protein status and not be
used to distinguish among subtleties in protein and nitrogen
metabolism.
Protein Storage
Although, in effect, there is some storage of excess amino
acids, they are not stored to the same degree that extra fat and
carbohydrates are stored. Structural proteins in all tissues,
especially in muscles and liver and serum albumin, can be
considered as amino acid stores. Muscle protein represents the
largest reserve from which amino acids may be drawn in times
of need. Too much loss of body protein impairs muscle func-
tion. Liver and muscle protein and serum albumin synthesis
increase after consumption of a protein-containing meal.
After protein synthesis is maximized, excess amino acids are
deaminated and transaminated to yield amino groups and
carbon skeletons. The carbon skeletons can be used for many
purposes including glucose precursors, which can be stored as
glycogen or converted to fatty acids and acetyl-CoA, which
can be used for fuel immediately. In the hours after consump-
tion of a meal containing protein, body protein synthesis
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
86
Table 5-11. Glucogenic and ketogenic amino acids.
Exclusively ketogenic
Leucine, lysine
Exclusively glucogenic
Alanine, serine, glycine, cysteine, 
aspartate, asparagine, glutamate, 
glutamine, arginine, histidine, valine,
threonine, methionine, proline
Ketogenic and glucogenic
Isoleucine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, 
tryptophan
Table 5-12. Factors for converting nitrogen to crude protein.
Food protein
Nitrogen (g/kg)
Conversion factor
Barley, oats, wheat
171.5
5.83
Corn, eggs, meat
160.0
6.25
Milk
156.8
6.38
Soybeans
175.1
5.71
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 86 ---
gradually declines as the amino acids from the meal are used.
Because protein turnover and obligatory nitrogen losses con-
tinue to occur, muscles must convert from net uptake to net
release of amino acids as fasting becomes dominant. Although
glycogen and lipids are the preferred short-term and long-
term energy stores, protein catabolism can supply carbon
skeletons needed to maintain glucose pools and supply the
body with energy (ATP). Protein degradation continues until
the next meal, after which protein synthesis exceeds protein
breakdown.
The carbon skeletons of catabolized amino acids can be
completely oxidized to carbon dioxide or converted by the
liver to glucose or ketone bodies. Thus, amino acids can be
glucogenic or ketogenic. Glucogenic amino acids can be
converted to glucose through pyruvate or any of the TCA
cycle intermediates. Ketogenic amino acids are those that
can be converted to acetyl-CoA or ketone bodies but cannot
be metabolized to glucose. Some catabolized amino acids
yield two different carbon skeletons, one ketogenic and the
other glucogenic (Table 5-11).
Protein Excretion
Amino acid catabolism produces waste nitrogen, if it is not
used for purine or pyrimidine synthesis. Catabolism of amino
acids typically leads to formation of ammonia, which is toxic
to body cells. Ammonia must be converted to a less toxic form
that can be transported in blood and excreted. Ammonia for-
mation occurs in all tissues, but is especially prevalent in the
liver and kidneys during gluconeogenesis. More than 90% of
the nitrogen resulting from protein degradation is converted to
urea in the liver and kidneys and then excreted in urine. A
smaller fraction of nitrogen is lost as ammonia, creatinine and
nitrate. Hepatic and renal detoxification of ammonia via the
urea cycle is a critical function.The amino acids ornithine, cit-
rulline and arginine are key intermediates. Other amino acids
(e.g., glutamate, aspartate, alanine and the amide group of glu-
tamine) carry excess amino groups from other tissues to the
liver and kidneys for conversion to urea. Catabolism of other
nitrogen-containing metabolites also contributes to the waste
nitrogen pool.
CLINICAL PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH
NITROGEN DISPOSAL
Hyperammonemia may result if any of the enzymes involved
in the urea cycle are lacking or have impaired activity. Part of the
therapy for any disease (e.g., liver disease) in which urea cycle
function is reduced is to decrease plasma concentrations of
ammonia. Reducing total protein intake, reducing intake of
nonessential amino acids and substituting keto analogues of
some amino acids may help reduce the ammonia load. Other
measures (e.g., dialysis, transfusion, administration of drugs and
other compounds that trap nitrogenous metabolites) can be used
to prevent an ammonia encephalopathy crisis (Chapter 68).
Reduced renal function may also impair nitrogen disposal
(i.e., urea may not be excreted efficiently). Reducing waste
products of protein catabolism through dietary manipulation
aids therapy for chronic renal failure (Chapter 37).
Catabolism of purines (adenine and guanine from
nucleotides, ATP and GTP, RNA and DNA) may also create
nitrogen disposal problems. Uric acid is the end product of
purine catabolism in people, nonhuman primates, birds and
Dalmatian dogs; all other mammals produce allantoin. Uric acid
and allantoin are excreted in urine and feces. Accumulation of
uric acid in serum can lead to gout (uric acid crystals in joints)
and uric acid uroliths. Hyperuricemia can be treated with drugs
(allopurinol) and with dietary intervention. Reducing total pro-
tein intake and reducing or eliminating dietary ingredients con-
taining high levels of purines (organ meats, glandular meats, fish
such as mackerel and sardines) have been successful in some
dogs with urolithiasis (Chapter 39).
Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) and protein-losing
nephropathy (PLN) are two syndromes in which excessive
amounts of protein are lost from the body. PLE is a group of
diseases characterized by excessive loss of serum protein into
the intestinal tract. Causes of PLE include lymphatic disorders
(lymphangiectasia, neoplasia, congestive heart failure) and dis-
eases associated with increased mucosal permeability or mucos-
al ulceration (intestinal neoplasia,granulomatous enteritis,lym-
phocytic-plasmacytic enteritis, intestinal parasitism, etc.).
PLN is characterized by excessive loss of serum protein into
urine. Causes of PLN include glomerulonephritis and amyloi-
dosis that develop secondary to chronic inflammatory condi-
tions such as neoplasia, heartworm disease, ehrlichiosis, sys-
temic mycosis, brucellosis, osteomyelitis and immune-mediat-
ed disease.
Analyses of Protein
Chemical Analyses of Protein
Protein concentration in foods (crude protein content) is typi-
cally calculated from the nitrogen content by the Kjeldahl
method or Dumas combustion procedure. The Kjeldahl
method involves digesting the food sample with sulfuric acid,
which converts all nitrogen in amino acids to ammonia. The
ammonia is distilled, collected and quantified using a colori-
metric titration procedure. The Dumas combustion procedure
requires no hazardous materials and involves measuring the
nitrogen gas after combustion and total destruction of the sam-
ple.This method has been adopted as an acceptable method for
measuring total nitrogen in animal foods (Etheridge et al,
1998). When using either method, two assumptions are made
in calculating crude protein from nitrogen. First, that all nitro-
gen in the food sample is present as protein and second, that all
protein contains 16% nitrogen. The crude protein content of
the food is then calculated: crude protein in food (g/kg) = g
nitrogen in food/kg x 6.25.
Neither assumption is always true. Not all nitrogen in food is
present as protein; some nitrogen is present as free amino acids,
amides, glycosides, alkaloids and ammonium salts. Other nitro-
gen is complexed with lipids. Different protein ingredients in
food also have different nitrogen contents and, therefore, differ-
ent conversion factors (Table 5-12).The use of an average con-
version factor (i.e., 6.25) for all proteins in food simplifies cal-
87
Macronutrients
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 87 ---
culations and can be rationalized by keeping in mind that most
pet foods are mixtures of protein-containing ingredients. In
addition, animal protein requirements are typically calculated
from determination of individual amino acid requirements that
are converted to nitrogen requirements and then expressed as a
protein requirement by multiplying nitrogen by 6.25. Although
the crude protein content of pet foods gives a measure of the
amount of nitrogen available to the animal, it does not provide
information about protein quality or the nutritional value of the
protein source(s).
Protein Quality
Protein quality refers to the efficiency by which amino acids
from food are converted into tissue. That efficiency in turn
depends on the protein source, concentration of essential amino
acids in the food and their availability (Brown, 1989). Proteins
that provide optimal proportions of all essential amino acids are
referred to as high quality proteins. When a protein lacks one
or more of the essential amino acids (limiting amino acid), the
quality of the protein decreases and it is referred to as a poor
quality protein (Orok et al, 1975). Other amino acids may not
be used when a limiting amino acid is absent. Poor protein qual-
ity can also result from an excess of certain amino acids that may
interfere with usage of other amino acids. (See Imbalance and
Antagonism.) Digestibility can influence protein quality and
can be affected by ash content, processing time and/or temper-
ature. The amino acids of poor quality protein cannot be prop-
erly digested and used by the animal. For example, overcooking
can form indigestible nutrient forms called Maillard complexes.
Processing methods and heat treatment of various feedstuffs can
also affect digestibility. Researchers studied the effects of pro-
cessing temperature and time on nutrient quality of moist dog
food (Jamikorn et al, 2000).They demonstrated that raising the
processing temperature (6ºC) or increasing the processing time
(25 min.) may alter nutrient content and digestion.
Other factors that can affect protein availability include fiber
content, tannins, pectins, oligosaccharides and phytase or
trypsin inhibitors, which can be found in plant protein sources.
Proteins of plant origin generally have lower digestibility than
animal proteins because plant fiber and carbohydrates lower
digestion, due to a reduced degradation rate of nutrients in the
gut and increased bacterial activity (Murray et al, 1997;
Neirinck et al, 1991; Meyer, 1984). Feeding high-fiber diets
decreases apparent protein digestibility (Kendall and Holme,
1982), presumably from increased adsorption of amino acids
and peptides by fiber, and obstruction of digestive enzymes by
fiber components in cell walls (Knabe et al, 1989).
Dogs use poor quality proteins less efficiently (Burns et al,
1982). Poor quality proteins can lead to profound nutritive fail-
ure, accompanied by a rapid decline in weight, loss of appetite
and eventual death (Palika, 1996; Rose and Rice, 1939). Dogs
and cats will increase food intake to meet their protein/amino
acid requirements for maintenance if the food contains low
quality protein. By understanding the availability of limiting
amino acids in a particular food or protein source, nutritionists
can improve the protein quality of the food through protein
complementation (feeding multiple protein sources) and/or
amino acid supplementation. Thus, measuring protein quality
becomes necessary in formulating different feedstuffs to supply
digestible amino acids or crude protein.
MEASURES OF PROTEIN QUALITY
Several methods have been used to determine the quality of
protein sources for animals. Some methods involve testing the
protein source by feeding it to animals (in vivo methods),
whereas other methods evaluate the protein’s quality by
chemically analyzing its amino acid composition (in vitro
methods). There are a number of ways to measure protein
quality in vivo. Many of these tests are based on variations of
nitrogen balance experiments.
The first and crudest method is the protein efficiency ratio
(PER), which measures the ability of dietary protein to be con-
verted into tissue.The method works only with young, growing
animals and may be influenced by the level of energy or fat in
the diet and by the level of dietary protein. The PER is calcu-
lated as: PER = weight gain of animal ÷ protein intake of ani-
mal (Brown, 1989; Burns et al, 1982). The typical PER value
for animal proteins is 2.5 (Brown, 1989).
The most frequently used measure of protein quality is bio-
logical value (BV), which is defined as the percentage of
absorbed protein retained. BV gauges the efficiency with which
the body is able to convert absorbed dietary amino acids into
tissues. The BV is calculated as: BV = (food nitrogen - [fecal
nitrogen + urinary nitrogen]) ÷ (food nitrogen + fecal nitrogen)
(Brown, 1989; Burns et al, 1982; Davidson et al, 1979). There
are some practical problems using BV as a measure of protein
quality. It is possible for a protein source to lack high digestibil-
ity, but have a high BV if the residue is absorbed and well used
by the animal (Brown, 1989).
To account for these differences in digestibility, a new
method (net protein utilization) was established for determin-
ing protein quality. This method, unlike BV, includes
allowances for nitrogen losses during digestion and is equal to
BV multiplied by true digestibility. Use of the coefficient allows
for adjustments to determine differences in true and apparent
availability of dietary amino acids for the animal (Brown, 1989;
Burns et al, 1982; Davidson et al, 1979).
The amino acid score (AAS) is a chemical method for com-
paring the amount of the first limiting amino acid in a test pro-
tein with the level of the same amino acid found in a reference
protein. The AAS is calculated as: AAS = mg of amino acid/g
of test protein ÷ mg of amino acid/g of reference protein. This
method for measuring protein quality is very rapid and highly
reproducible. Because it is derived solely from amino acid com-
position, AAS does not compensate for differences in digestibil-
ity that can be caused by processing (Brown, 1989; Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 1973).
The slope ratio method is a biologic equivalent of the AAS.
The slope ratio method compares the growth performance pro-
duced by a test protein with that of a reference protein such as
defatted whole egg (Samonds and Hegsted, 1977). The slope
ratio (SR) is calculated as: SR = slope of response curve for ani-
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
88
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 88 ---
89
Macronutrients
Table 5-13. Small intestinal and total tract crude protein and small intestinal amino acid digestibility of dog foods containing animal protein sources.*
Small
Ingredient
% CP of
Carbohydrate
Total tract
intestinal
Arg
His
Iso
Leu
Lys
Met
Phe
Thr
Try
Val
dog foods
source
CPD (%)
CPD(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Beef and bone meal1
25
Corn/wheat
82.4
68.3
79.4
68.5
73.1
78.5
74.8
84.7
74.8
58.5
-
70.0
Beef, fresh2
20
Rice
89.8
80.4
92.4
84.1
88.4
88.5
87.2
91.0
80.6
77.3
-
86.3
Chicken and chicken by-product meal3
33
Cornstarch
85.1
73.4
86.8
76.2
77.9
78.9
80.3
86.0
75.2
69.0
-
74.7
With beet pulp inclusion (9% TDF)3
33
Cornstarch
83.9
70.9
87.3
75.4
78.3
79.1
80.0
87.2
72.8
67.2
-
74.7
With low-cellulose mixture inclusion (10% TDF)3 33
Cornstarch
83.2
66.1
83.4
68.7
71.1
74.1
68.2
86.2
69.0
62.7
-
68.9
With high-cellulose mixture inclusion (10% TDF)333
Cornstarch
82.4
76.7
87.9
77.6
79.1
81.0
78.6
86.7
77.4
72.0
-
77.2
With Solka Floc inclusion (9% TDF)3
33
Cornstarch
86.7
77.8
88.7
80.0
81.5
82.6
83.5
87.7
78.0
73.6
-
79.0
Egg, whole2
20
Rice
91.2
77.0
91.5
80.5
88.4
87.5
84.8
91.4
76.1
72.7
-
86.2
Lamb meal6
20
Corn
79.7
67.0
77.4
60.4
66.7
74.5
62.4
84.3
57.0
52.0
-
63.8
Meat and bone meal, rendered2
20
Rice
88.2
79.9
91.6
82.8
88.7
88.1
86.8
91.7
79.9
76.3
-
86.9
Meat and bone meal, high ash6
20
Corn
83.2
72.7
88.5
79.2
85.6
87.5
83.8
92.7
77.4
77.9
-
82.8
Meat and bone meal, low ash6
20
Corn
79.7
65.7
83.7
68.9
69.8
76.6
69.7
86.6
62.6
59.9
-
70.0
Meat and bone meal, low temperature6
20
Corn
85.2
76.4
88.8
79.4
83.7
86.0
83.4
93.3
75.5
75.8
-
82.4
Poultry by-product meal1,5,6,7
20
Rice
89.5
73.9
88.5
74.5
84.0
83.5
80.1
84.7
73.4
67.3
-
81.2
25
Corn/wheat
81.6
77.2
86.8
80.1
81.8
83.9
82.2
87.6
80.4
71.3
-
70.0
35
Rice
75.5
74.4
89.0
78.8
77.2
78.1
80.5
79.0
82.0
67.9
-
72.2
35
Corn
77.9
63.0
75.6
60.5
66.0
68.1
65.2
77.7
66.6
52.1
-
60.0
With beet pulp inclusion (7% TDF)7
35
Rice
75.4
66.3
88.3
73.3
72.1
73.6
75.3
74.1
79.2
57.3
-
65.5
With soy hull inclusion I:S = 1.86 (7% TDF)7
35
Rice
74.1
66.2
86.8
73.2
73.0
75.0
75.2
71.8
77.6
61.1
-
69.1
With soy hull inclusion I:S = 2.65 (8% TDF)7
35
Rice
72.7
57.2
85.5
66.4
66.7
68.6
70.1
81.2
74.2
52.3
-
60.3
With soy hull inclusion I:S = 3.17 (9% TDF)7
35
Rice
78.4
59.3
85.0
65.9
65.9
67.8
69.1
69.5
74.4
52.2
-
59.4
With soy hull inclusion I:S = 5.18 (7% TDF)7
35
Rice
70.9
67.4
85.3
70.1
71.8
73.3
74.6
68.8
76.9
60.3
-
67.1
With soy hull inclusion I:S = 7.21 (8% TDF)7
35
Rice
73.9
69.5
86.7
71.7
72.7
73.8
75.5
72.3
77.7
60.7
-
67.9
With high protein corn5
35
Corn
75.4
64.7
80.8
64.3
70.3
72.6
69.9
82.1
70.2
59.1
-
65.5
With high protein, low-phytate corn5
35
Corn
76.8
57.0
76.6
56.2
63.6
64.8
64.4
74.3
63.7
51.9
-
58.3
With high amylose corn5
35
Corn
69.7
65.4
76.1
56.5
65.4
66.9
64.7
78.9
65.8
54.0
-
60.8
With amylomaize starch5
35
Corn
72.6
62.9
76.1
53.8
64.8
64.6
63.8
82.8
64.2
51.7
-
69.5
Poultry by-product meal, low ash6
20
Corn
80.1
68.0
78.0
63.6
69.8
75.0
65.5
83.4
56.7
54.2
-
65.5
Poultry by-product meal, high ash6
20
Corn
82.3
68.4
78.3
61.8
67.7
74.4
64.1
84.7
55.0
52.7
-
63.2
Poultry, fresh2
20
Rice
89.8
82.8
93.6
86.1
90.8
91.0
89.5
93.4
84.2
81.4
-
89.3
Poultry meal, low ash4,8,9
10
Cornstarch/rice
81.0
76.3
88.5
81.7
53.7
78.3
77.1
86.3
78.7
70.2
86.6
72.8
10
Cornstarch/rice
84.5
73.4
86.2
75.5
78.7
80.2
76.8
92.6
79.0
64.7
83.9
72.3
15
Cornstarch/rice
84.5
79.3
91.3
86.5
71.4
83.5
83.0
89.0
83.7
77.3
84.7
79.3
20
Cornstarch/rice
86.3
79.4
90.7
84.4
74.9
83.5
83.0
90.3
83.8
76.8
80.8
78.8
20
Cornstarch/rice
86.4
72.9
73.4
77.5
83.2
81.3
80.5
86.3
81.9
70.5
72.0
78.0
25
Cornstarch/rice
86.6
78.1
89.9
83.0
75.4
82.6
82.0
89.0
83.2
75.5
77.2
77.7
Poultry meal, regular ash1,10,11
25
Corn/wheat
87.5
73.9
86.9
74.3
78.7
82.0
79.7
86.5
78.7
67.4
-
74.9
30
Corn
77.2
65.1
80.0
66.5
69.3
73.4
74.9
67.3
60.6
56.7
-
65.9
30
Potato starch/rice
76.9
72.7
88.3
75.9
79.5
80.3
81.0
79.4
71.6
71.9
-
75.6
Minimum digestibility (%)
-
-
69.7
57.0
73.4
53.8
53.7
64.6
62.4
67.3
55.0
51.7
72.0
58.3
Maximum digestibility (%)
-
-
91.2
82.8
93.6
86.5
90.8
91.0
89.5
93.4
84.2
81.4
86.6
89.3
Average digestibility (%)
-
-
81.2
70.9
85.1
72.9
74.9
78.0
76.2
83.7
73.8
65.0
80.9
72.4
Key: CP = crude protein, CPD = crude protein digestibility, Arg = arginine, His = histidine, Iso = isoleucine, Leu = leucine, Lys = lysine, Met = methionine, Phe = phenylalanine, Thr = thyronine,
Try = tryptophan, Val = valine, TDF = total dietary fiber, I:S = insoluble fiber:soluble fiber.
*Adapted from 1Bednar GE, Patil AR, Murray SM, et al. Starch and fiber fractions in selected food and feed ingredients affect their small intestinal digestibility and fermentability and their large
bowel fermentability in vitro in a canine model. Journal of Nutrition 2001; 131: 276-286. 2Murray SM, Patil AR, Fahey GC Jr, et al. Raw and rendered animal by-products as ingredients in dog diets.
Journal of Animal Science 1997; 75: 2497-2505. 3Muir HE, Murray SM, Fahey GC Jr, et al. Nutrient digestion by ileal cannulated dogs as affected by dietary fibers with various fermentation charac-
teristics. Journal of Animal Science 1996; 74: 1641-1648. 4Yamka RM, Kitts SE, True AD, et al. Evaluation of maize gluten meal as a protein source in canine foods. Animal Feed Science and
Technology 2004; 116: 239-248. 5Gajda M, Flickinger EA, Grieshop CM, et al. Corn hybrid affects in vitro and in vivo measures of nutrient digestibility in dogs. Journal of Animal Science 2005; 83:
160-171. 6Johnson ML, Parsons CM, Fahey GC Jr, et al. Effects of species raw material source, ash content, and processing temperature on amino acid digestibility of animal by-product meals by
cecectomized roosters and ileally cannulated dogs. Journal of Animal Science 1998; 76: 1112-1122. 7Burkhalter TM, Merchen NR, Bauer LL, et al. The ratio of insoluble to soluble fiber compo-
nents in soybean hulls affects ileal and total tract nutrient digestibilities and fecal characteristics in dogs. Journal of Nutrition 2001; 131: 1978-1985. 8Yamka RM, Jamikorn U, True AD, et al.
Evaluation of low-ash poultry meal as a protein source in canine foods. Journal of Animal Science 2003; 81: 2279-2284. 9Yamka RM, Kitts SE, Harmon DL. Evaluation of low-oligosaccharide and
low-oligosaccharide low-phytate whole soya beans in canine foods. Animal Feed Science and Technology 2005; 120: 79-91. 10Zuo Y, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, et al. Digestion responses to low
oligosaccharide soybean meal by ileally-cannulated dogs. Journal of Animal Science 1996; 74: 2441-2449. 11Clapper GM, Grieshop CM, Merchen NR, et al. Ileal and total tract digestibilities and
fecal characteristics of dogs as affected by soybean protein inclusion in dry, extruded diets. Journal of Animal Science 2001; 79: 1523-1532.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 89 ---
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
90
Table 5-14. Small intestinal and total tract crude protein and small intestinal amino acid digestibility of dog foods containing plant protein sources.*
Small
Ingredient
% CP of
Carbohydrate
Total tract
intestinal
Arg
His
Iso
Leu
Lys
Met
Phe
Thr
Try
Val
dog foods
source
CPD (%)
CPD (%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Corn gluten meal3
15
Cornstarch/rice
84.7
75.0
85.3
76.6
78.8
85.6
76.6
92.6
83.0
66.0
80.9
74.4
20
Cornstarch/rice
87.8
79.3
85.2
80.5
80.9
88.9
77.8
91.7
86.4
71.9
79.9
78.1
25
Cornstarch/rice
90.3
82.5
87.6
84.3
82.9
91.2
80.4
92.8
89.1
75.1
82.9
81.5
30
Cornstarch/rice
91.1
81.3
86.5
80.4
83.2
90.9
76.4
90.7
88.5
73.9
76.8
79.7
Soybean meal, 48% CP1,4,5,6,7,8
10
Cornstarch/rice
68.1
65.4
88.3
82.0
70.1
76.7
79.0
75.6
80.7
57.0
72.9
66.4
15
Cornstarch/rice
68.6
66.2
88.3
81.0
71.6
75.5
81.2
76.5
80.5
59.6
65.3
66.3
20
Cornstarch/rice
64.3
59.8
85.2
76.0
63.9
68.8
76.4
70.2
75.4
47.8
51.8
56.4
20
Cornstarch/rice
78.2
84.8
73.9
81.6
89.1
86.5
86.6
91.2
90.2
75.6
76.7
83.7
20
Cornstarch/rice
83.2
82.0
72.8
79.2
77.9
77.6
75.5
80.3
81.6
69.9
81.2
69.4
25
Cornstarch/rice
65.5
51.1
83.5
70.4
59.2
64.0
71.4
63.5
71.7
39.6
39.3
50.3
25
Corn/wheat
88.4
79.2
89.3
82.0
82.9
85.5
82.9
88.2
82.8
70.7
-
78.1
30
Corn
84.6
77.4
90.5
83.0
83.9
84.6
85.6
72.6
73.2
70.1
-
78.7
30
Potato starch/rice
83.9
85.3
93.2
87.3
89.1
88.0
89.3
85.7
83.9
80.1
-
85.3
Soybean meal, low oligo7
30
Corn
83.2
78.3
90.5
83.0
83.9
84.6
85.6
72.6
73.2
70.1
-
78.7
Soybean meal, low oligo and low phytate4
20
Cornstarch/rice
83.8
79.2
75.7
78.5
76.1
78.2
77.0
79.0
82.6
65.4
74.2
69.7
Soybeans, whole4
20
Cornstarch/rice
76.8
69.8
66.4
69.9
67.5
69.0
69.5
75.1
72.8
58.5
77.3
59.0
Soybeans, whole, low oligo5
20
Cornstarch/rice
81.8
71.7
67.5
76.9
83.2
78.6
79.2
85.4
83.6
66.4
62.3
73.7
Soybeans, whole, low oligo and low phytate4,5
20
Cornstarch/rice
82.4
75.1
75.3
82.5
86.1
82.9
83.6
89.4
86.9
70.6
66.0
79.6
20
Cornstarch/rice
76.7
68.8
65.6
61.9
63.3
65.4
65.4
74.0
74.6
54.8
58.7
58.3
Soy flour8
30
Potato starch/rice
87.3
87.2
94.1
88.7
90.1
89.1
91.0
88.2
85.9
82.7
-
86.8
Soy flour, defatted2
20
Rice
88.3
79.5
91.5
82.1
87.6
86.7
86.3
90.1
78.6
74.0
-
85.5
Soy protein concentrate, aqueous
alcohol extracted8
30
Potato starch/rice
86.5
82.6
93.2
86.7
87.2
86.2
89.3
79.4
81.0
72.6
-
82.4
Soy protein concentrate, extruded8
30
Potato starch/rice
84.7
84.5
93.5
86.0
87.7
86.9
88.8
87.1
83.6
78.0
-
83.6
Soy protein concentrate, modified
molecular weight (low antigen)8
30
Potato starch/rice
89.3
85.9
94.3
88.5
89.5
88.6
91.1
82.3
84.2
79.5
-
85.6
Minimum digestibility (%)
-
-
64.3
51.1
65.6
61.9
59.2
64.0
65.4
63.5
71.7
39.6
39.3
50.3
Maximum digestibility (%)
-
-
91.1
87.2
94.3
88.7
90.1
91.2
91.1
92.8
90.2
82.7
82.9
86.8
Average digestibility (%)
-
-
81.6
76.3
84.1
80.4
79.8
81.7
81.1
82.3
81.4
67.9
69.7
74.6
Key: CP = crude protein, CPD = crude protein digestibility, Arg = arginine, His = histidine, Iso = isoleucine, Leu = leucine, Lys = lysine, Met = methionine, Phe = phenylalanine, Thr = thyronine, Try
= tryptophan, Val = valine.
*Adapted from 1Bednar GE, Patil AR, Murray SM, et al. Starch and fiber fractions in selected food and feed ingredients affect their small intestinal digestibility and fermentability and their large
bowel fermentability in vitro in a canine model. Journal of Nutrition 2001; 131: 276-286. 2Murray SM, Patil AR, Fahey GC Jr, et al. Raw and rendered animal by-products as ingredients in dog
diets. Journal of Animal Science 1997; 75: 2497-2505. 3Yamka RM, Kitts SE, True AD, et al. Evaluation of maize gluten meal as a protein source in canine foods. Animal Feed Science and
Technology 2004. 4Yamka RM, Hetzler BM, Harmon DL. Evaluation of low-oligosaccharide low-phytate whole soybeans and soybean meal in canine foods. Journal of Animal Science 2005; 83:
393-399. 5Yamka RM, Kitts SE, Harmon DL. Evaluation of low-oligosaccharide and low-oligosaccharide low-phytate whole soya beans in canine foods. Animal Feed Science and Technology
2005; 120: 79-91. 6Yamka RM, Jamikorn U, True AD, et al. Evaluation of soyabean meal as a protein source in canine foods. Animal Feed Science and Technology 2003; 109: 121-132. 7Zuo Y,
Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, et al. Digestion responses to low oligosaccharide soybean meal by ileally-cannulated dogs. Journal of Animal Science 1996; 74: 2441-2449. 8Clapper GM, Grieshop
CM, Merchen NR, et al. Ileal and total tract digestibilities and fecal characteristics of dogs as affected by soybean protein inclusion in dry, extruded diets. Journal of Animal Science 2001; 79:
1523-1532.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 90 ---
mals fed the test protein ÷ slope of response curve for animals
fed the reference protein. The slope ratio method usually uses
growth as the response and may be sensitive to different levels
of energy (Brown, 1989).
Ileal-cannulated dogs can also be used to determine protein
quality (Walker et al, 1994). Protein digestibility coefficients
based on collection and analyses of digesta from the terminal
ileum give a more accurate measure of protein nitrogen
absorbed than those based on fecal collections. Values deter-
mined from terminal ileal digesta exclude endogenous protein
secretion from the GI tract and contributions from intestinal
microflora. Ileal collection eliminates the large intestine and
bacterial fermentation as sources of error. Use of ileal-cannulat-
ed dogs has enabled researchers to study the effects of feeding
various protein sources and carbohydrates on digestibility and
protein quality. Tables 5-13 and 5-14 summarize recent work
with ileal-cannulated dogs and demonstrate the differences in
quality among various protein sources. Because of the compli-
cations involved with using ileal-cannulated cats (Mawby et al,
1999), no published studies have investigated protein quality
using this model. As a result, only total tract crude protein
digestibility data are available for cats (Table 5-15).
Finally, stable isotopes have been used to study protein
quality. Whole body nitrogen flux can be determined using
15N-glycine and 13C-leucine. These markers have been used
extensively in human pediatrics (Bolster et al, 2001; Zello et
al, 2003), human geriatrics (Chevalier et al, 2003; Gibson et
al, 2002) and in young-adult/aging dogs (Williams et al,
2001).
Protein quality varies with the animal species; poor quality
proteins for one monogastric species may not be poor quality in
other monogastrics (e.g., dogs vs. cats). The sensitivity of qual-
ity depends on the rate of growth or the level of demand to syn-
thesize proteins for needs such as lactation, trauma, athletic
performance and stress. Animals that are relatively inactive,
mature and under no stress may not be very sensitive to mod-
erate differences in protein quality (Brown, 1989).
Protein/Amino Acid Requirements
Factors Affecting Requirements
New proteins can be synthesized from dietary amino acids or
nonessential amino acids that were previously synthesized by
the body. By definition, essential amino acids used in protein
synthesis must be provided by food.Therefore, animals do not
have a requirement for protein per se but have an amino acid
requirement. The amount of each amino acid that an animal
requires varies based on factors such as growth, pregnancy,
lactation and some disease states. In addition to requiring spe-
cific essential amino acids, dogs and cats have a requirement
for building blocks (carbon skeletons and nitrogen) for
nonessential amino acids. The building blocks for nonessen-
tial amino acids can either be derived from excess essential
amino acids that are broken down and reassembled into
nonessential amino acids or from other nonessential amino
acids in food. Thus, a complete statement of amino acid
requirements should include all the essential amino acids and
an amount of amino nitrogen that can be used for synthesis of
nonessential amino acids.
The amount of protein or amino acids that must be includ-
ed in a pet food also depends on how much food the animal
consumes. It is easy to understand why animals that are grow-
ing, pregnant or lactating require dietary protein to support
new tissue growth and milk production. If an animal only con-
sumes small quantities of food to meet its energy requirement
then the food needs to have a greater protein concentration to
meet the animal’s protein requirement. For example, high-calo-
rie pet foods should have more protein as a percentage of the
91
Macronutrients
Table 5-15. Total tract crude protein (CP) digestibility of cat foods
containing plant and animal protein sources.*
Carbohydrate Total tract CP  
Protein source
source
digestibility (%)
Fish meal1
Corn
78
Meat meal2,4
Corn
91
Soy protein
-
-
With 25% butter3
Cornstarch
91
With 25% lard3
Cornstarch
92
With 25% unbleached 
tallow3
Cornstarch
90
With 25% bleached tallow3
Cornstarch
90
With 25% chicken fat3
Cornstarch
90
With 25% yellow grease3
Cornstarch
90
Corn gluten meal1,2,4
Corn
74
Corn
70
Corn
86
Chicken and chicken 
by-product5
Cornstarch
87
With 12.49% beet pulp5
Cornstarch
83
With 8.07% Solka Floc5
Cornstarch
88
With 3.91% citrus pectin, 
3.34% locust bean gum, 
2.22% carob bean gum, 
1.66 guar gum5
Cornstarch
59
With 6.26% Solka Floc, 
2.08% gum arabic5
Cornstarch
86
With. 9.04% beet pulp, 
3.26% rice bran, 
1.51% citrus pectin, 
1.22% carob bean gum5
Cornstarch
83
Chicken meal4
Corn
86
Poultry meal6
Not available
94
With 10% peanut hulls6
Not available
84
With 10% beet pulp6
Not available
93
With 10% alfalfa meal6
Not available
92
*Adapted from 1Funaba M, Tanaka T, Kaneko M, et al. Fish meal
versus maize gluten meal as a protein source for dry cat food.
Journal of Veterinary Medical Science 2001; 63: 1355-1357.
2Funaba M, Matsumoto C, Matsuki K, et al. Comparison of maize
gluten meal and meat meal as a protein source in dry foods for-
mulated for cats. American Journal of Veterinary Research 2002;
63; 1247-1251. 3Kane E, Morris JG, Rogers QR. Acceptability and
digestibility by adult cats of diets made with various sources and
levels of fat. Journal of Animal Science 1981; 53: 1516-1523.
4Funaba M, Oka Y, Kobayashi S, et al. Evaluation of meat meal,
chicken meal and corn gluten meal as dietary protein sources of
protein in dry cat food. Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research
2005; 69: 299-304. 5Sunvold GD, Fahey JC Jr, Merchen NR, et al.
Dietary fiber for cats: In vitro fermentation of selected fiber
sources by cat fecal inoculum and in vivo utilization of diets con-
taining selected fiber sources and their blends. Journal of Animal
Science 1995; 73: 2329-2339. 6Fekete SG, Hullar I, Andrasofszky
E, et al. Effect of different fibre types on the digestibility of nutri-
ents in cats. Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition
2004; 88: 138-142.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 91 ---
food than low-calorie foods. The opposite is also true. Larger
portions of low-calorie foods are typically consumed; therefore,
animals can adequately meet their daily requirements with a
food that has a lower percentage of protein.
Adult animals also need dietary protein to replace the amino
acids that enter pathways of amino acid catabolism and are
permanently lost. Healthy adults also have a daily requirement
for protein to replace nitrogen lost as urea, ammonia, creati-
nine, nitrate in urine and feces, sloughing of epithelial cells in
skin and the GI tract, sweat, hair, nasal secretions, semen from
males and secretions due to reproductive cycles in females.
Dietary protein that must be consumed each day to replace the
obligatory nitrogen loss is termed the maintenance protein
requirement.
Adult and growing animals have maintenance requirements
for protein, but only growing animals have the additional pro-
tein requirement for growth. The additional protein required
by pregnant and lactating animals really supports growth. An
animal’s physiologic state also may result in increased or
decreased protein catabolism and nitrogen losses. For exam-
ple, patients with cancer, burns and trauma may have
increased daily protein requirements.
Nitrogen balance is the difference between the nitrogen
consumed and the amount lost each day. Growing animals,
pregnant females and any animals that are replenishing or
rebuilding tissue are in positive nitrogen balance. Zero nitro-
gen balance occurs in normal healthy adults receiving mini-
mally adequate or more than adequate dietary protein when
nitrogen output equals nitrogen intake. Negative nitrogen
balance can occur during lactation, starvation or fasting when
there is inadequate or no protein intake. Excessive body pro-
tein catabolism due to burns, injury, fever, infections, hor-
monal imbalance or psychological causes can also cause neg-
ative nitrogen balance. Amino acid imbalances and antago-
nisms can cause negative nitrogen balance even when ade-
quate amounts of protein are consumed.
IMBALANCE AND ANTAGONISM
Essential amino acids must be provided in adequate
amounts and in proper balance. When amino acids are used
for protein synthesis, all the amino acids necessary to synthe-
size each protein must be present. The amino acid in shortest
supply relative to demand is called the “first limiting amino
acid.” An imbalance occurs when one or more amino acids
needed for protein synthesis are not available in the quantity
needed, but at least one other amino acid is provided in excess
(Harper et al, 1970). Amino acid antagonism occurs when
amino acids have similar chemical structures (Harper et al,
1970).Typically, an excess of one of these amino acids increas-
es the requirement of one or more chemically similar amino
acids (antagonism). Amino acid imbalance or antagonism
does not typically occur in animals consuming commercial pet
foods because most foods use complementary proteins (plant
and animal sources). However, even use of complementary
protein sources can result in imbalances or deficiencies of
other amino acids. Therefore, it becomes important to under-
stand the optimal levels and ratios of the essential amino acids
necessary for animals.
The ideal or perfect protein concept was first established in
swine. This concept defines the ideal ratio of essential amino
acids necessary to maximize tissue growth and diet usage.
Researchers used the same concept for dogs and cats by extrap-
olating data from requirement studies using foods with purified
amino acids (Baker and Czarnecki-Maulden, 1991). The
requirement of each amino acid was determined by feeding
graded levels of essential amino acids (with the same metabo-
lizable energy) to puppies and kittens. These amino acids were
then compared to the lysine requirement. Thus, the ideal pro-
tein concept creates ratios of the essential amino acids to lysine
and is independent of total dietary nitrogen (crude protein of
the food) and energy levels (Table 5-16). This ratio assures the
protein in the food is “perfect” by containing optimal levels of
amino acids (no imbalances or deficiencies).
Protein Requirements for Dogs and Cats
The absolute minimum dietary protein requirement can be
estimated by feeding extremely high-quality protein or com-
monly used protein sources. If the estimate is based on feed-
ing high-quality protein (e.g., lactalbumin), a growing dog
requires approximately 18% DM protein and an adult dog
about 8% DM protein (NRC, 2003). AAFCO has estab-
lished that canine foods containing commonly used protein
ingredients should contain at least 22% DM protein for
growth, and 18% DM protein for adult maintenance (2007).
It is important to note that AAFCO recommendations
should be interpreted as daily allowances, not as absolute min-
imum requirements.
Growing kittens and adult cats have higher protein require-
ments than most other domestic species. The minimum pro-
tein requirement has been estimated to be about 18% DM for
kittens and 16% DM for adult cats, assuming use of extreme-
ly high-quality protein sources (NRC, 2003). For commercial
foods using commonly available protein sources, AAFCO has
recommended that foods for kittens and adult cats contain at
least 30 and 26% DM protein, respectively (2007). Again,
AAFCO recommendations for protein should be interpreted
as daily allowances, not as an absolute minimum requirement.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
92
Table 5-16. Ideal amino acid profiles (relative to lysine) for 
dogs and cats.*
Amino acids
Dogs
Cats
Lysine
1.00
1.00
Methionine + cystine
0.64
1.00
Tryptophan
0.22
0.19
Threonine
0.67
0.87
Arginine
0.71
1.12
Isoleucine
0.57
0.63
Valine
0.75
0.75
Leucine
1.00
1.50
Histidine
0.29
0.38
Phenylalanine + tyrosine
1.00
1.12
*Baker DH, Czarnecki-Maulden GL. Comparative nutrition of cats
and dogs. Annual Review of Nutrition 1991; 11: 239-263.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 92 ---
Amino Acids of Special Importance
Several amino acids have important roles in the nutrition and
health of dogs and cats. Among these are taurine, arginine and
glutamine/glutamate.
Taurine
Taurine is a sulfur-containing β-amino acid. The amino
group resides on the second (β) carbon rather than the first
(α) carbon as with other amino acids. Taurine also has a sul-
fonic acid (SOOH) rather than a carboxylic acid group.
Taurine is not incorporated into proteins synthesized by the
body because of its structure. Rather, taurine is found as a free
amino acid in many tissues, including brain, retina, myocardi-
um, skeletal muscle, liver, platelets, leukocytes, and in fluids
such as milk and in complexes with bile salts (Zelikovic and
Chesney, 1989).
Taurine is conjugated to bile acids to form water-soluble bile
salts that assist in absorption of dietary fats. Taurine also serves
as a neurotransmitter and neuromodulator in the central nerv-
ous system and is involved with body temperature regulation,
brain development, maintenance of normal retinal structure
and normal heart function (Zelikovic and Chesney, 1989).
Taurine is also thought to conjugate toxic compounds, serve as
an antioxidant, stabilize cell membranes and regulate cell vol-
ume and osmolarity (Zelikovic and Chesney, 1989).
Taurine is an essential amino acid because cats have mini-
mal ability to synthesize it and have obligatory losses due to
the necessity for conjugating bile acids to taurine. Unlike
other animals, cats conjugate bile acids only to taurine and not
to glycine. Furthermore, cats have an obligatory loss of taurine
in the feces due to bacterial degradation in the intestine and
intestinal losses of taurine through enterohepatic circulation.
This obligatory loss coupled with a minimal capacity for cats
to synthesize taurine makes it an essential amino acid for this
species.
Documented signs of taurine deficiency include reproduc-
tive failure in queens, developmental abnormalities in kittens,
central retinal degeneration and dilated cardiomyopathy
(Pion et al, 1987; Morris et al, 1994). Taurine deficiency is
more likely to occur in cats that are fed dog foods, homemade
foods and vegetarian foods that are not supplemented with
taurine.
Taurine requirements in cats are highly dependent on
ingredient sources and processing. The requirement increases
slightly with increased dietary protein. Certain proteins (e.g.,
isolated soya protein) and the canning process increase the
dietary taurine allowance compared with freezing or using
casein as the protein source. Processing neither destroys nor
binds appreciable quantities of taurine; however, processing
apparently alters food so that enhanced numbers of intestinal
bacteria degrade taurine. The specific biochemical alteration
of food responsible for this change has not been described.
Current recommendations are to include at least 1 g of puri-
fied crystalline taurine/kg (0.1% DM) in dry foods and at
least 2 g of purified crystalline taurine/kg for moist foods
(0.2% DM) (AAFCO, 2007).
There is no evidence that taurine is an essential amino acid
for dogs; however, research indicates that it may be condition-
ally essential. In one study, investigators showed that feeding
a high-fat food (24% DM) significantly reduced plasma tau-
rine concentrations. Taurine values for some dogs were mar-
ginally deficient (Sanderson et al, 1996). Dilated cardiomy-
opathy in American cocker spaniels and golden retrievers has
also been associated with plasma taurine deficiency and low
myocardial taurine concentrations (Kramer et al, 1995)
(Chapter 36).
Arginine
Arginine is a basic amino acid that is essential for dogs and cats
of all ages.Cats develop signs of deficiency rapidly.Within three
hours after consuming a meal devoid of arginine, cats develop
hyperammonemia, vomiting, ataxia, vocalization (moaning) and
hyperactivity; death may occur. Similar signs of ammonia toxic-
ity such as tremors, vomiting, profuse salivation and hyper-
glycemia appear quickly in dogs following a meal that lacks argi-
nine. Arginine is a key intermediate in the urea cycle, which is
the major metabolic pathway that detoxifies nitrogenous wastes,
such as ammonia (Milner, 1989). Ornithine and citrulline can
substitute for arginine and prevent hyperammonemia because
they are also urea cycle intermediates. However, they cannot
restore growth rates (Morris et al, 1979). Ornithine and cit-
rulline are not present in high enough quantities to substitute for
arginine in typical commercial foods for dogs and cats.
Most protein sources provide adequate arginine; therefore,
most commercial pet foods are not supplemented with argi-
nine. Supplements, such as milk replacers, or products intend-
ed for other species, such as some human enteral products,
should be evaluated carefully for their arginine content before
being administered to dogs and cats. In studies, the minimum
arginine content of food that maximized growth in kittens was
0.83% (DM) (Anderson et al, 1979; Morris and Rogers, 1978;
Costello et al, 1980). AAFCO recommends that foods for
growing kittens and adult cats contain at least 1.25 and 1.04%
DM arginine, respectively (2007).
For growing puppies, a dietary arginine content of 0.4 to
0.56% (DM) supported maximum weight gain (Czarnecki and
Baker, 1984); however, 0.56% DM supported optimal growth
and nitrogen balance (Ha et al, 1978). AAFCO recommends
that foods for growing puppies and adult dogs contain at least
0.62 and 0.51% DM arginine, respectively (2007).
The role of arginine in the formation of nitric oxide in the
body has been investigated. Nitric oxide is classified as a hor-
mone that helps regulate flow through blood vessels and is
thought to be involved with blood pressure regulation. Nitric
oxide is synthesized by the endothelial cells lining blood vessels
and by macrophages to assist in infection control.
Glutamine/Glutamate
Glutamine and glutamate are five-carbon amino acids that are
structurally similar and play key metabolic roles in the citric acid
cycle, transamination reactions, generation of NADPH, γ-
aminobutyric acid (GABA), the antioxidant glutathione and as
93
Macronutrients
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 93 ---
folic acid cofactors.The carboxyl group of glutamate is replaced
by an amide nitrogen in glutamine. The two amino acids are
interconverted by the enzymes glutaminase (glutamine to gluta-
mate + ammonia) and glutamine synthetase (glutamate +
ammonia to glutamine).
For many years, glutamine and glutamate were considered
nonessential amino acids; however, numerous studies have
demonstrated that endogenous glutamine storage and synthe-
sis may not be adequate to meet the body’s needs in certain sit-
uations, such as critical illness, infection, cancer chemotherapy,
low birth weight infants, diarrhea, human immunodeficiency
virus infection, bone marrow transplantation and cardiac sur-
gery (Neu et al, 1996; Souba et al, 1990; Klimberg et al, 1990;
Furst et al, 1989; Lacy and Yost, 1990). Glutamine is also the
preferred fuel of the small intestinal mucosa. Therefore, gluta-
mine has been reclassified as a conditionally essential amino
acid (Neu et al, 1996; Lacy and Yost, 1990).
Supplementation of pet foods or any food product with L-
glutamine is difficult because the amino acid is unstable
through heating and cooking processes. Glutamine breaks
down into glutamate and ammonia. The latter can be toxic
when ingested. L-glutamine can be added safely to powdered
amino acid mixtures that are reconstituted with water and
administered immediately to the animal. In complete pet foods,
glutamine is best supplied by a high-quality, high-protein food.
Protein Deficiency
Clinical signs of protein deficiency include reduced growth
rate, anorexia, anemia, infertility, reduced milk production,
alopecia, brittle hair and a poor coat (Harper et al, 1970) (Case
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
94
Table 5-17. Summary of protein quality of common pet food ingredients.
Protein 
Amino acid 
Other 
Ingredient
(%)*
(protein) quality**
comments
Egg (dried)
45-49
Good
Also contains lecithin
High quality, the standard to which many 
other sources are compared
CS = 100, BV = 94, NPU = 94, PER = 3.92
Casein
80
Good
High tryptophan, lysine
CS = 58, BV = 80, NPU = 72, PER = 2.86
Whey
12
Good
High lysine, isoleucine, threonine, tryptophan
Beef, lamb, pork, chicken
29
Good
May be variable in fat and connective
Low tryptophan
tissue content
CS = 69, BV = 74, NPU = 67, PER = 2.30
Liver
20
Good
Also a good source of vitamin A
Fish meal
59
Good
High tryptophan, lysine, methionine
Highly variable
Meat and bone meal
45-50
Good
Highly variable, may contain high levels of
bone that contribute to excess calcium,
phosphorus and magnesium in food
Lamb meal
55
Good
Highly variable, may contain high levels of
bone that contribute to excess calcium,
phosphorus and magnesium in food
Chicken/poultry 
58
Good
by-product meal
High lysine, methionine
Mineral levels can be variable
Soybean meal
48
Good
High tryptophan, lysine
CS = 47, BV = 73, NPU = 61, PER = 2.32
Good complementary protein source for
meats, fish meal and corn
Corn gluten meal
60
Good
Good complementary protein source for
meats and fish meal
Corn (whole)
8
Adequate
Low tryptophan, lysine, methionine
CS = 41, BV = 59, NPU = 51, PER = 1.12
Also good source of linoleic acid
Rice (white)
7
Adequate
CS = 56, BV = 64, NPU = 57, PER = 2.18
Low-mineral levels
Wheat
14
Adequate
Low tryptophan, lysine
CS = 43, BV = 65, NPU = 40, PER = 1.53
Contains gliadin
Barley
12
Adequate
Low tryptophan, methionine
Contains gliadin
Collagen (gelatin)
88
Poor
Totally deficient in tryptophan
CS = 0, BV = 0, NPU = 0, PER = 0
Key: CS = chemical score, BV = biological value, NPU = net protein utilization, PER = protein efficiency ratio.
*Feedstuffs Ingredient Analysis Table: 1996 Edition. (As is basis.)
**Adapted from Brody T. Protein. In: Nutritional Biochemistry. San Diego, CA: Academic Press Inc, 1994; 295-352. Jurgens MH, Animal 
Feeding and Nutrition, 6th ed. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Co, 1988; 172. National Research Council. Improvement of Protein Nutrition.
Committee on Amino Acids, Food and Nutrition Board. National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC, 1974; 70. Robinson DS. The 
nutritional value of food proteins. In: Food Biochemistry and Nutritional Value. New York, NY: Wiley & Sons Inc, 1987; 117-151.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 94 ---
5-2). If specific essential amino acids are deficient, the clinical
signs can be similar to those of general protein deficiency. A
deficiency of calories (energy) and essential amino acids (pro-
tein-energy malnutrition) increases catabolism of muscle and
other body proteins (e.g., albumin and immunoglobulins).
Continued failure to consume protein results in muscle atro-
phy and decreased blood levels of albumin, transferrin, thyrox-
ine-binding protein and retinol-binding protein because car-
bon skeletons from these proteins are used as an energy source
to supply glucose through gluconeogenesis.
Albumin concentrations in serum are not a particularly sen-
sitive indicator of short-term protein malnutrition because the
turnover rate is relatively long. Fatty liver can also be a sign of
protein deficiency because specific apolipoproteins needed by
VLDL to package and export fat from the liver are not synthe-
sized in adequate quantities or at all during protein deficiency.
Protein Toxicity/Excess
Although not a practical problem, amino acid toxicity can
occur if any amino acid is fed at a very high level. It is very
hard to create an amino acid toxicity by feeding protein
sources from plants or animals; however, synthetic amino
acids mistakenly added to foods at very high levels can cause
toxicity (Harper et al, 1970). Synthetic amino acids currently
added to some pet foods include L-methionine or D,L-
methionine, L-lysine, L-arginine and taurine.
The minimum dietary protein requirement for healthy adult
dogs is about 8% (DM) (NRC, 2003); however, AAFCO rec-
ommends that dog foods contain a minimum of 18% DM pro-
tein (2007). Healthy adult cats require a minimum of 16% DM
protein (NRC, 2003); however, AAFCO recommends that
foods contain at least 26% DM protein (2007). Commercial
dog foods contain three to seven times the minimum protein
requirement. Some commercial cat foods contain two to four
times the minimum protein requirement (Chapter 20).
Excess dietary protein can be problematic for dogs and cats
with specific disease conditions. For example, any disease that
affects organs involved with conversion of ammonia to urea and
waste nitrogen disposal can result in accumulation of toxic by-
products of protein metabolism. In particular, protein intake
above requirement should be carefully monitored in any animal
with impaired renal or liver function (Chapters 37 and 68). In
other situations, such as struvite urolith dissolution in dogs and
adverse food reactions in cats and dogs, minimizing excess
dietary protein is a beneficial part of therapy (Chapters 31 and
43). In these cases, excess dietary protein could be considered
“conditionally toxic.”
Feeding protein above requirements or recommendations for
healthy dogs and cats does not result in a true toxicity because
the excess amino acids from the protein are catabolized and the
waste nitrogen is excreted. However, not all dogs and cats that
appear healthy are free of disease. Dogs and cats with chronic
renal disease are usually subclinical until the disease has pro-
gressed to the point that two-thirds or more of functional renal
tissue is lost (Osborne and Stevens, 1981). Protein excess may
contribute to progression of the disease. In addition to any
direct effects protein excess might have on the progression of
subclinical renal disease (Klahr, 1989), excess protein may con-
tribute to acidemia (Chapter 37).This development is especial-
ly important in older cats with marginal renal function. Thus,
even in apparently healthy dogs and cats, excess dietary protein
may at times be conditionally toxic.
Protein excesses are found in pet foods for several reasons.
Cats are strict carnivores (Chapter 19) and have a higher pro-
tein requirement than dogs, which are omnivores (Chapter
12). However, some pet food companies have perpetuated the
myth that dogs are carnivores and that meat-based, high-pro-
tein foods are more natural and thus better than lower protein
foods that contain both animal and plant sources of protein.
Other fallacies, such as high levels of dietary protein build
more muscle or a thicker coat, have contributed to pet owners’
mistaken perception that higher protein is indicative of a high-
er quality pet food.
Excess protein adds unnecessary cost to foods. Excess protein
is used for energy. As an energy source, protein is no better than
digestible carbohydrate; however, protein is a more expensive
energy source. The increased costs associated with increased
dietary protein are invariably passed on to pet owners.
There are no nutritional reasons that support providing
excessive amounts of dietary protein. After the protein/amino
acid requirements are met, additional protein provides no addi-
tional benefits. Thus, dog foods for adult maintenance should
not exceed 30% DM protein. Cat foods for adult maintenance
should not exceed 45% DM protein.
Sources
Many ingredients supply protein/amino acids to pet foods
(Table 5-17). Typical pet food ingredients that have high-pro-
tein concentrations are animal tissues from chicken, turkey, fish,
beef and lamb and viscera such as livers, lungs and spleens.
Grains also supply protein to pet foods. In fact, a large portion
of the protein in cereal-based dry pet foods typically comes
from grains, including rice, corn, wheat and barley. Some plant
products (e.g., soybean meal and corn gluten meal) are concen-
trated sources of plant protein.
Multiple protein sources are often combined to improve the
overall quality and amino acid profile when foods are formu-
lated. This method of improving protein quality is termed
protein complementation (Zapsalis and Beck, 1985). Protein
sources are combined based on their amino acid excesses and
deficiencies so that the nutritional weaknesses of each source
will be counterbalanced by the strengths of other sources,
resulting in a food with high-quality protein. Corn and soy-
bean meal are typically used in animal food formulations to
take advantage of protein complementation. Corn protein is
low in lysine and tryptophan, whereas soybean meal is ade-
quate in both amino acids. When used together in one food,
these two protein sources provide a well-balanced amino acid
profile.
Amino acid fortification is another method for improving
the protein quality of foods (Zapsalis and Beck, 1985). Here,
one or more individual amino acids are added to a food when
95
Macronutrients
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 95 ---
the main protein source of the food may be limiting.
Methionine and lysine are typically used to fortify pet foods.
LIPIDS
Definition
Lipids are high energy compounds that supply nutritional and
functional requirements in mammals. Generally, lipids share
the physiochemical property of being insoluble (hydrophobic)
in polar solvents such as water. Lipids that are solid at room
temperature are commonly called fats whereas those that are
liquid at room temperature are referred to as oils. In a nutrient
analysis, the ether extract of a food contains primarily lipids and
represents the crude fat content (Figure 5-3).
Structure
The structure of lipids ranges from simple to complex although
any one classification scheme is difficult to impose. The basic
subunits of lipids are hydrocarbon molecules linked by covalent
bonds in various manners to themselves and other molecules in
a vast assortment of permutations that result in the myriad of
functions and structures observed in nature. Table 5-18 and
Figures 5-16 and 5-17 will be helpful for reference throughout
this chapter and the text.
Function
Dietary intake of lipids benefit the animal by supplying energy,
essential fatty acids (EFA) and a positive environment for fat-
soluble vitamin absorption. Dietary fats are the most concen-
trated forms of energy sources in pet foods, supplying 2.25
times the metabolizable energy of proteins and carbohydrates.
Excess dietary lipids may be assimilated and stored as fat in
adipocytes, whereas additional lipids are incorporated into
functional lipid or catabolized for fuel, depending on the ener-
gy status of the animal. Triglycerides compose the majority of
fat found in adipocytes, which may be synthesized de novo
from nonfat precursors such as carbohydrate or protein during
periods of positive energy balance.
Some lipids required for adequate physiologic function, such
as certain long-chain fatty acids, cannot be synthesized de novo
and are thus required in food. These fatty acids are called EFA
because a lack of them in foods results in classic signs of defi-
ciency. A small amount of lipid (1 to 2% of total food) of no
specific structure is also required in foods for proper absorption
of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K).
Fatty Acids
Structure
Nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA) consist of hydrocarbon chains
ranging from two to 24 carbons or more, with a carboxylic acid
group on one terminus and a methyl group on the opposite ter-
minus. NEFA that contain 14 to 24 carbons are classified as
long chain,eight to 12 medium chain and two to six short chain.
Figure 5-17 shows fatty acid chemistry and structure.
Lipid may be either in liquid or solid state depending on
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
96
Figure 5-16. Fatty acids consist of hydrocarbon chains with a car-
boxylic acid group (COOH) on one terminus and a methyl group on
the opposite terminus. Fatty acids with no double bonds in the
hydrocarbon chain are referred to as saturated, one double bond
as monounsaturated and more than one double bond, polyunsatu-
rated. The carbon on the opposite terminus from the carboxylic
acid group is designated the number one carbon and given the
symbol n-1. Nomenclature specifies the number of carbons and the
location and number of double bonds. For example, an 18-carbon
polyunsaturated fat with three double bonds, the first of which is
between carbons 6 to 7 is designated 18:3n-6 (γ-linolenic).
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 96 ---
temperature and fatty acid composition. A more unsaturated
(increased number of double bonds) fatty acid makeup results
in fats that have lower melting points compared with those of
fats made from more saturated (decreased number or no dou-
ble bonds) fatty acids. The length of the carbon chains in the
fatty acids making up a fat also changes the melting point. Fats
that contain fatty acids of shorter carbon chain length have
lower melting points than do fats that contain longer fatty
acids. Animals take advantage of these differences in physical
characteristics to synthesize phospholipids containing appro-
priate classes of fatty acids that allow for membrane fluidity at
physiologic temperatures.
Omega-3, Omega-6 and Omega-9 
Fatty Acid Families 
Fatty acids with the first double bond between the third and
fourth carbon are in the omega-3 family, sixth and seventh car-
bon the omega-6 family and ninth and tenth carbon the
97
Macronutrients
Table 5-18. Classification, structure and function of general lipids.
Classification
Structure
Function
Hydrocarbons
-CH3, -CH2, -CH
Building blocks
Nonesterified fatty acids
CH3(CH2)n(CH1)nCOOH
Saturated
Stearic, palmitic
Energy, membrane fluidity
Monounsaturated
Oleic, palmitoleic
Energy, membrane fluidity
Polyunsaturated
Omega-3, omega-6
Precursors of eicosanoids and prostaglandins 
Simple lipids
Fatty acid + alcohol in ester bond
Energy storage, insulation
Triglycerides
Glycerol + three fatty acids
Complex lipids
Phospholipids
Diacyl glycerol 3’ phosphate
Membrane lipids
Lecithin
3’ phosphocholine
Emulsifying agent
Cephalin
3’ phosphoserine/ethanolamine
CNS membrane
Inositol
Carbohydrate (3’ phosphoinositol)
2nd messenger
Ceramide
Sphingosine + fatty acid
CNS membrane
Sphingomyelin
Ceramide + phosphocholine
Myelin
Glycolipids
Sphingomyelin + carbohydrate
CNS membrane/recognition
Cerebroside
Ceramide + monosaccharide
Ganglioside
Ceramide + oligosaccharide
Prostaglandins
20-carbon polyunsaturated fatty acids
Paracrine and autocrine action
Sterols and steroids
Four-ring hydrocarbon structures
Bile acids, hormones, membranes, lipoproteins,
cholesterol, cholesterol esters
Fat-soluble vitamins
See vitamins
See vitamins
Box 5-8. Cis and Trans Fatty Acids.
When carbons are connected by a double bond, rotation around
the bond is not possible resulting in fatty acids that are either
cis (with the carbons being on the same side) or trans (with the
carbons being on the opposite side). Most polyunsaturated fatty
acids are in the cis configuration. Fatty acids can be converted,
however, to the trans configuration during excessive heating or
through partial hydrogenation (i.e., the production of margarine
from oil). Although trans fatty acids are metabolized for energy
and incorporated into storage lipid, similar to the cis isomers,
they are not further metabolized to eicosanoids. Nutritionally,
trans isomers are in many ways like saturated fatty acids in that
they are used for energy but cannot function as essential fatty
acids.
Box 5-9. Long-Chain vs. Medium-Chain
Fatty Acid Metabolism.
Medium-chain fatty acids (mcFFA eight to 12 carbon lengths)
are a minor component of natural compounds such as triglyc-
erides from mother’s milk or coconut milk. Triglycerides con-
taining mcFFA are assigned the name medium-chain triglyc-
erides (MCT). Even in foods “rich” with MCT, the overall contri-
bution to the fat component of those foods is minor, compared
with long-chain triglycerides. However, because MCT are sub-
ject to different metabolic regulation they may prove useful in
certain disease states and have been included in some foods
formulated for specific diseases (Table 1).
The Bibliography for Box 5-9 can be found can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
Table 1. Comparison between medium-chain triglycerides
(MCT) and triglycerides.
Process 
MCT 
Triglycerides
Gut hydrolysis
Rapid, 5x triglycerides
Slower rate than
MCT
Absorption
2x faster than 
Slower rate than
triglycerides
MCT
Enterocyte 
Free fatty acid 
Free fatty acid 
reprocessing
not reassembled  
reassembled in
in triglycerides
triglycerides
Transport
Portal vein,  
Chylomicrons, 
albumin bound
lymphatics and then
general circulation
Hepatocyte
Esterification Not esterified to CoA
Esterified to CoA
Carnitine 
Not bound to carnitine
Bound to carnitine
β-oxidation
Unregulated
Regulated
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 97 ---
omega-9 family. The omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acid families
are EFA because they cannot be synthesized de novo in mam-
mals; lack of EFA in foods results in suboptimal physiologic
activity (MacDonald et al, 1984a). Mammals are capable of de
novo synthesis of saturated fatty acids and fatty acids of the
omega-9 series up to 18 carbons (McGarry, 1986).
Subsequently, mammals may elongate and desaturate de novo
or dietary fatty acids of all classes via enzymes specific for cer-
tain carbons in the hydrocarbon chain (Figure 5-19). However,
mammals cannot desaturate fatty acids between the n-1 carbon
and the n-3, n-6 or n-9 double bond. Because of the specifici-
ty of these enzyme systems, unsaturated fatty acids cannot be
converted between families (e.g., omega-6 or omega-9 to
omega-3). Also, because of limitations and specificity in metab-
olism, monounsaturated and saturated fatty acids cannot be
converted to EFA (e.g., omega-9 or stearate to omega-6).
Members of the omega-6 family include linoleic acid (18:2n-
6), γ-linolenic acid (18:3n-6) and arachidonic acid (20:4n-6).
Dogs, but not cats, are able to elongate and desaturate linoleic
acid to form arachidonic acid (MacDonald et al, 1984b, 1984c;
McLean and Monger, 1989). Thus, linoleic acid is usually list-
ed as an EFA for dogs, whereas, both linoleic acid and arachi-
donic acid are EFAs for cats. The omega-6 fatty acid family is
required for growth, reproduction and precursors of eicosanoid
and prostaglandin synthesis.
Members of the omega-3 family include α-linolenic
(18:3n-3), eicosapentaenoic (20:5n-3) (EPA) and docosa-
hexaenoic (22:6n-3) acids (DHA). The omega-3 fatty acid
family, especially 22:6n-3, is required for brain and retinal
function (Neuringer et al, 1984; Arbuckle and Innis, 1992).
Both fatty acid families contribute to cell membrane fluidity
and skin health. Processing EFA in pet foods may affect their
biologic activity (Box 5-8). Table 5-19 summarizes the fami-
lies, common names and biologic uses of several fatty acids
found in nature.
Lipid Metabolism
GI Handling of Dietary Lipid
Lipids in foods include triglycerides, phospholipids, choles-
terol, cholesteryl esters and fat-soluble vitamins. Long-chain
NEFA make up a very small percentage of dietary lipids and
will not be discussed here. Dogs and cats digest dietary lipids
efficiently, with apparent lipid digestibility normally ranging
between 80 and 95%. Increased levels of saturated and trans
fatty acids reduce lipid digestibility (Box 5-8).
Fats and oils must undergo digestion via enzymatic and phys-
ical processes before they can be absorbed from the lumen of the
gut. The following steps are involved in lipid digestion, absorp-
tion and initial metabolism (Figure 5-19) (Brody, 1994a):
• Gastric lipase in the stomach and duodenum degrades
triglycerides of intact lipid micelles.
• Bile salts emulsify lipid micelles to form mixed micelles and
coactivate pancreatic lipase.
• Pancreatic lipase and colipase hydrolyze triglycerides in
mixed micelles.
• Gastric and pancreatic lipase activity results in 2-monoacyl-
glyceride + two NEFA.
• NEFA and 2-monacylglyceride are absorbed into entero-
cytes.
• Triglycerides are reformed in enterocytes from long-chain
NEFA and 2-monoacylglyceride.
• Apolipoproteins + triglycerides + cholesterol form chylomi-
crons in enterocytes and enter lymphatics.
• Chylomicrons in lymphatics enter the general circulation
via the thoracic duct.
• Chylomicrons are partially metabolized and remnants
attach to liver receptors.
Triglyceride-containing medium-chain fatty acids undergo
similar processing until they enter the enterocyte at which point
they are not re-esterified, but transported via albumin directly
to the liver for metabolism (Box-5-9).
Short-chain fatty acids (particularly butyrate) resulting from
fiber fermentation in the large intestine are an important source
of fuel for colonocytes. Excess short-chain fatty acids enter the
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
98
Box 5-10. Lipoprotein Lipase.
Lipoprotein lipase is an enzyme that hydrolyzes triglycerides
into nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA) and glycerol. Lipoprotein
lipase is located within the cell and is under hormonal control,
specifically insulin. In its inactive state, lipoprotein lipase lies
underneath the cell membranes that surround blood vessels. It
is attached to the inner surface of the cell via a rope-like pro-
tein connection. Under the influence of insulin, this connection
is loosened and the lipoprotein lipase is allowed to “float” to the
cell surface where it can hydrolyze triglycerides in lipoproteins.
Apo-CII is required as a coenzyme for lipoprotein lipase. The
resulting NEFA diffuse into the cell for metabolism and glycerol
is transported back to the liver for metabolism. Some lines of
domestic cats have a genetic defect that results in absence of
lipoprotein lipase activity.
Box 5-11. Good and Bad Cholesterol.
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) is the smallest of the lipoprotein
molecules and is synthesized primarily in the liver and to a less-
er degree in enterocytes. HDL is involved in reverse cholesterol
transport. HDL transfers free cholesterol from cell membranes
to the HDL molecule as cholesterol esters via an enzyme
lecithin: cholesterol acyl transferase.The cholesterol esters may
be transferred to very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) by cho-
lesterol ester transfer protein to eventually form low-density
lipoprotein (LDL), which provides cholesterol to peripheral cells.
Alternatively, the cholesterol esters may be delivered to the liver
in HDL for excretion as bile salts. Because HDL is capable of
transporting cholesterol from the periphery to the liver for dis-
posal, it is said to contain “good cholesterol.” LDL, on the other
hand, is said to contain “bad cholesterol” because it transports
cholesterol to the periphery where excess may result in arterial
plaque and cardiovascular disease.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 98 ---
portal circulation for metabolism by the liver.
Hepatic Handling of Dietary Lipid
The liver determines the fate of dietary lipid under the direc-
tion of hormonal signals related to energy balance.The primary
fuel source for hepatocytes is provided via β-oxidation of
NEFA whether dietary or endogenous in origin (Figure 5-8).
The fate of dietary lipid from chylomicron origin can be traced
as follows (Figure 5-19) (Brody, 1994b):
• Chylomicron remnants attach to receptors on liver cells.
• Triglycerides are hydrolyzed to glycerol and CoA esterified
fatty acids.
• CoA esterified fatty acids may be either shunted to β-oxi-
dation in mitochondria or repackaged into triglycerides and
then VLDL for use by peripheral tissues (storage or fuel).
Their fate depends on the energy status of the animal.
• Glycerol is converted to 3-P-glycerol (only in liver) and
enters the carbohydrate metabolic pathway.
Although fat storage is easily accomplished by de novo syn-
thesis (production of fat from carbohydrate or protein), it is
more energy efficient for animals to deposit dietary fat than to
synthesize it. When fat is deposited from foods, the fatty acid
profile tends to reflect the type of fat consumed. When fat is
synthesized, stored fat composition reflects the fat synthetic
enzyme activity of the animal.
Lipoprotein Metabolism
Lipoproteins are relatively large conglomerates of protein and
lipid that are necessary to transport hydrophobic lipids effective-
ly through the aqueous medium of physiologic solutions. Table
5-20 gives a generic relative composition of the different
lipoprotein classes observed in mammals (Chapter 28). As the
protein component increases, the relative density of the lipopro-
tein increases reflecting dilution of the buoyant density of fat.
Lipoproteins are made only in the liver (VLDL, HDL) and
enterocytes (chylomicrons). The protein fraction, before it is
integrated with the lipid component, is termed apolipoprotein.
Lipoprotein metabolism is very complex with species varia-
tion. However, a general introduction is necessary to under-
stand lipoprotein metabolic disorders discussed in later chap-
99
Macronutrients
Figure 5-17. Triglycerides are the main storage forms of fatty
acids, each molecule of which is composed of a three-carbon glyc-
erol nucleus and three fatty acids (R1, R2, R3).
Figure 5-18. Diagram of metabolic pathways (elongation and
desaturation) for essential fatty acids.
Table 5-19. Essentiality and biologic function of common fatty acids.
Structure
Common name
Essential
Biologic function
14:0
Myristic
No
Energy use and storage, acylation of proteins
16:0
Palmitic
No
Energy use and storage, acylation of proteins
16:1
Palmitoleic
No
Energy use and storage
18:0
Stearic
No
Energy use and storage, membrane fluidity
18:1n-9
Oleic
No
Energy use and storage, phospholipid structure
18:2n-6
Linoleic
Yes
Energy use and storage, arachidonic acid precursor (20:4n-6)
18:3n-3
Alpha-linolenic
Yes
Energy use and storage, eicosapentaenoic acid precursor (20:5n-3)
18:3n-6
Gamma-linolenic
Yes
Energy use and storage, arachidonic acid precursor
20:4n-6
Arachidonic
Yes (cat)
Energy use and storage, synthesis of cytokines and eicosanoids, synthesis of
No (dog)
steroid hormones, membrane fluidity, competitor of eicosapentaenoic acid 
(20:5n-3)
20:5n-3
Eicosapentaenoic
Probably
Energy use and storage, synthesis of cytokines and eicosanoids, retinal and 
nervous tissue development, membrane fluidity, competitor of arachidonic  
acid (20:4n-6)
22:6n-3
Docosahexaenoic
Probably
Energy use and storage, retinal and nervous tissue development, membrane 
fluidity, competitor of omega-6 fatty acids
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 99 ---
ters. An important point to remember is lipoprotein structure is
not static and each class of lipoprotein has characteristics that
may overlap with other classes. The following outline and
Figure 5-20 depict lipoprotein metabolism from the origin of
lipoproteins in enterocytes or hepatocytes (Brody, 1994b):
• Chylomicrons are formed in enterocytes.
• HDL transfers apolipoprotein C-II and E (lipoprotein
lipase cofactors) to chylomicrons and VLDL.
• Lipoprotein lipase in peripheral tissue hydrolyzes triglyc-
erides in chylomicrons (Box 5-10).
• Chylomicron remnants bind to receptors in the liver.
• Liver hydrolyzes, reforms triglycerides and combines new
apolipoproteins to form VLDL or HDL.
• VLDL triglycerides are hydrolyzed by lipoprotein lipase in
the periphery to form VLDL remnants.
• VLDL remnants are taken up by the liver or converted to
LDL for uptake by peripheral tissues.
• HDL made in the liver (major) and enterocytes (minor)
transport excess cholesterol from the periphery to the liver
for excretion in bile salts (Box 5-11).
Storage
Excess energy intake is stored in adipocytes as triglycerides.
The triglycerides in adipocytes are formed directly from
excess dietary fat or from de novo synthesis of fat in the liver
under appropriate metabolic signals. The fat energy store in
human adipocytes is capable of supporting life for one to two
months. The key enzyme for release of energy from
adipocytes is hormone sensitive lipase, which is under the
control of hormonal signals (Box 5-12).
Lipid Function
Energy
Although providing dietary fat is an excellent way to meet an
animal’s energy requirement, this requirement can also be theo-
retically met by the protein and carbohydrate content of a food.
On a per weight basis, the energy value of dietary fat is approx-
imately 2.25 times that of protein or carbohydrate. Additionally,
direct use of dietary fat for storage in adipocytes or use in func-
tional lipid requires less energy for assimilation and storage
when compared with de novo synthesis from protein or carbo-
hydrate in food. In other words, fat stored directly from dietary
fat has 10 to 15% more energy than fat made from excess dietary
carbohydrate or protein because of the inherent loss of efficien-
cy in de novo fat synthesis. This increased efficiency of fat use
results in an increased energy value for dietary fat that animals
may use to meet energy requirements or store as adipose tissue.
Essentiality
Fatty acids of the omega-6 family have functionally distinct
effects compared with those of fatty acids of the omega-3 fam-
ily. The addition of lipid-containing arachidonic acid to foods
containing no arachidonic acid results in increased feed effi-
ciency during growth and enhanced skin condition including
reduced epidermal water loss. Arachidonic acid also allows
processes requiring eicosanoids to occur such as reproduction
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
100
Figure 5-19. Digestion, absorption and fate of dietary triacylglyc-
erides in mammals. See text for details. Key: TAG = triglyceride,
MAG = monoacylglyceride, NEFA = nonesterified fatty acid,
LC-NEFA = Long-chain NEFA, CM = chylomicron, VLDL = very
low-density lipoprotein.
Box 5-12. Hormone Sensitive Lipase.
Hormone sensitive lipase (HSL) catalyzes the reaction of triglyc-
erides to nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA) and glycerol in
adipocytes. Under the influence of insulin (following a meal),
HSL is modified to a very low activity, which favors deposition of
triglycerides in adipose tissue. Under the influence of glucagon
(fasting) or epinephrine (flight or fight mechanism), HSL is high-
ly active and the result is an efflux of NEFA and glycerol into the
blood (bound to albumin) for transport to other tissues as an
energy source. The NEFA that arrive back at the liver are catab-
olized or repackaged to triglycerides. In some pathologic condi-
tions, triglycerides may accumulate in the liver (feline hepatic
lipidosis) because the necessary repackaging materials for very
low-density lipoprotein synthesis are not available in the liver.
Table 5-20. Composition of general lipoprotein classes in 
mammals.
Lipoprotein
Acronym
Protein:lipid (%)
Chylomicron
CM
1:99
Very low-density lipoprotein
VLDL
10:90
Low-density lipoprotein
LDL
25:75
High-density lipoprotein
HDL
50:50
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 100 ---
and platelet aggregation (MacDonald et al, 1984b, 1984c).
Because dogs can convert linoleic acid (18:2n-6) to arachidon-
ic acid (20:4n6), linoleic acid is usually listed as an EFA for
dogs. A concentration of 1% of the food DM as linoleic acid is
a safe and effective concentration for dogs (Wiese et al, 1962,
1965, 1966).
Because linoleic acid corrected many clinical signs of fatty
acid deficiency in cats, it also is listed as an EFA for cats
(McDonald et al, 1984a). Some of the signs of EFA deficien-
cy in cats, however, were not ameliorated by linoleic acid but
rather improvement depended on arachidonic acid supple-
mentation. One group of investigators concluded that cats
cannot convert linoleic acid to arachidonic acid in sufficient
quantities for platelet aggregation and prevention of mild
mineralization of the kidneys (McDonald et al, 1984b).
Arachidonic acid supplementation allows normal reproduc-
tion in female cats (McDonald et al, 1984c). Male reproduc-
tion (spermatogenesis), unlike female reproduction, does not
require dietary arachidonate because of the testes’ ability to
elongate and desaturate linoleate (McDonald et al, 1984c).
These studies indicate that arachidonate is an EFA for cats.
Foods for cats should contain at least 0.5% DM linoleic acid
101
Macronutrients
INTRODUCTION
Beneficial actions of polyunsaturated fatty acids were noted many
years ago but the underlying mechanisms for these effects are
poorly understood. It is clear that arachidonic acid is transformed
into many potent bioactive compounds such as prostaglandins,
leukotrienes and lipoxins. The departure of fatty acids from simply
playing structural roles in cell membranes and/or as energy stores
came largely from the recognition of the rapid transformation of
arachidonic acid to these potent eicosanoids by both cyclooxyge-
nase and lipoxygenase mechanisms. Many of the classic
prostaglandins and leukotriene mediators are pro-inflammatory
and play a decisive role in inflammation and/or in systems in which
prostaglandins are key physiologic regulators. Inflammation is a
vital reaction but it also plays a central role in many prevalent
chronic diseases such as osteoarthritis, periodontal disease,
inflammatory bowel disease, cancer, brain aging/dementia, aller-
gic dermatitis and lower urinary tract disease.
In sharp contrast, it has become clear in recent years that
counter-regulatory substances such as lipoxins are generated dur-
ing resolution of acute inflammation, and that these serve as ago-
nists for endogenous antiinflammatory mechanisms. This consti-
tutes the first evidence that the resolution of inflammation, which
was once thought to be a passive process, is actually an active
process that involves up-regulating specific pro-resolution circuits.
Thus, resolution of inflammation is an active endogenous process
aimed at protecting the host from exacerbated inflammation.
THE OMEGA-3 FATTY ACID CONNECTION
The molecular mechanisms underlying the beneficial actions of
polyunsaturated fatty acids remain an area of active research.
Investigators have recently identified novel oxygenated products
generated by enzymatic processes from the precursor omega-3
fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA). These new compounds possess potent actions in the reso-
lution of inflammation and may also have neuroprotective proper-
ties. The term resolvin (resolution phase interaction products) has
been proposed for some of these compounds because they dis-
play potent antiinflammatory and immunoregulatory properties,
reducing neutrophil traffic and the magnitude of the inflammatory
response. The term protectin (or neuroprotectin) has been pro-
posed given the protective actions of some of these compounds in
neural and retinal tissues.
Resolvins are derived from EPA (E series) and DHA (D series).
Both the D and E classes of resolvins appear as biosynthetic prod-
ucts involving cell-to-cell interaction with vascular endothelial cells
and are potent regulators of leukocyte infiltration. Specifically,
resolvin E1 (RvE1) dramatically reduces dermal inflammation, peri-
tonitis, colitis, periodontitis, dendritic cell migration and interleukin
(IL)-12 production. Resolvins of the D series block tumor necrosis
factor-alpha activity and act as potent regulators to limit leukocyte
infiltration into inflamed brain, skin and peritoneum.
Among the essential fatty acids, DHA is concentrated in the
central nervous system, neurons and retina where it is thought to
regulate membrane fluidity and ion fluxes. The term docosanoids
has been proposed to describe products generated from DHA.
DHA-derived docosatrienes have neuroprotective action in retinal
cells and can improve the sequelae associated with stroke and
dementia. The terms protectin or neuroprotectin describe these
compounds, which are rapidly generated from DHA and released
locally into tissues. There is emerging evidence that resolvins and
docosanoid compounds may also have immunoregulatory actions
by influencing antigen-presenting cells and T-cell traffic.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL 
IMPLICATIONS
Fatty acid supplementation has been used for many years to
help manage patients with a variety of inflammatory diseases.
The underlying mechanisms for the beneficial effects of fatty
acid supplementation have been poorly understood. Recent
research has identified novel oxygenated compounds termed
resolvins and protectins, which are generated from EPA and
DHA. These endogenous lipid/chemical mediators are “switched-
on” in the resolution phase of an inflammatory response, thus
acting as “braking-signals” in inflammation and reducing leuko-
cyte-mediated injury in several different tissues. The discovery of
resolvins and protectins offers molecular mechanisms that could
underlie some of the beneficial actions of dietary fatty acid sup-
plementation observed in many clinical settings.
Philip Roudebush, DVM, Dipl. ACVIM
(Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Hill’s Scientific Affairs
Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Topeka, KS, USA
The Bibliography for Box 5-13 can be found can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
Box 5-13. What’s New in Fatty Acids: Resolvins, Protectins and 
Omega-3-Derived Mediators.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 101 ---
and at least 0.02% DM arachidonic acid.
Studies with primates have shown that 22:6n-3 (DHA)
is essential for the normal development of nervous tissue
and the retina (Neuringer et al, 1984). Studies with piglets
have shown that dietary omega-3 fatty acids influence
developing brain and retina (Arbuckle and Innis, 1992).
The eicosanoids resulting from omega-3 fatty acid metab-
olism are less immunologically stimulating than those
resulting from omega-6 fatty acids (Figure 5-18). Thus,
feeding omega-3 fatty acids has been recommended in sit-
uations in which a reduced inflammatory response is
desired such as: 1) before and after surgery, 2) after trauma,
injury, burns and some types of cancer and 3) to assist in
control of dermatitis, arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease
and colitis (Hansen et al, 1995; Ogilvie et al, 1995;
Kinsella et al, 1990).
Fatty acids of the omega-3 family, when compared with
those in the omega-6 family, have been shown, in some
cases, to decrease platelet aggregation and increase bleeding
time (Leaf and Weber, 1988). Dietary omega-3 fatty acids
slightly depressed platelet activity in rats and people; how-
ever, this finding is usually not a practical problem in healthy
animals (Goodnight, 1989). Healthy adult dogs fed 7% of
the food DM as omega-3 fatty acids from fish oil, over a
period of two months, showed no problems with activated
partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin time, buccal
mucosal bleeding time clotting or platelet aggregation
(Myers et al, 1996).
Although more research with omega-3 fatty acids in com-
panion animals needs to be done, it is prudent to conclude that
omega-3 fatty acids will be shown to be essential for normal
function of the retina and brain as well as for physiologic home-
ostasis. At this time there are no conclusive data proving the
optimal level or relationship of omega-3 fatty acids to omega-
6 fatty acids for any species at any specific lifestage. The opti-
mal relationship will likely depend on many individual param-
eters and differ depending on individual physiologic function
(Boxes 5-7 and 5-13).
Neurologic Development
In children, during periods of early growth, DHA is needed
to support retinal and auditory development (Pawlosky et al,
1997; Birch et al, 2002; Diau et al, 2003). DHA enhancement
of visual and auditory development has also been demonstrat-
ed in other species. These enhancements reflect a general
improvement in neurologic development overall, as a result of
dietary supplementation of DHA during growth. Further-
more, brain development and learning ability are enhanced in
infants supplemented with DHA (Birch et al, 2002; Hoffman
et al, 2003). Because of these studies and others, it is now
accepted that human infant formulas need supplemental
DHA for proper brain development (Uauy and Mena, 2001;
Birch et al, 2000).
Similar to findings in other species, inclusion of fish oil as a
source of DHA in puppy foods improved trainability (Kelley et
al,2004).Conversion of short-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids
to DHA is an inefficient process in mammals. Thus, there is a
need to consider the essentiality of adding a source of DHA for
growing puppies and kittens. The need for DHA supplemen-
tation during growth in kittens may be even more important
than in puppies considering the cat’s reduced ability to convert
shorter chain fatty acids to DHA.
Osteoarthritis and Cartilage Health
Omega-3 fatty acids reduce inflammation associated with
arthritis. Recent work suggests that incorporating EPA into
canine cartilage models reduced the amount of glycosamino-
glycan release when challenged with a stimulant compared to
culturing with arachidonic acid (Chapter 34). Addition of EPA
to dog food suppresses production of proinflammatory
cytokines and cartilage degradative enzymes (Yamka et al,
2006a). Another study further demonstrated improved mobili-
ty and reduced cartilage degradation biomarkers. These data
demonstrate the antiinflammatory effect of EPA in dogs, and
the importance of omega-3 lipids for enhanced mobility.
Similarly, in cats, cartilage health can be enhanced by omega-
3 fatty acid supplementation as in dogs (Yamka et al, 2006b).
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
102
Table 5-21. Fatty acid composition of commercial fats and oils.*
Fatty
Chicken
Fish
Corn
Sunflower 
Soybean
Olive
acid
Name
Butter**
Tallow**
Lard***
fat***
oil***
oil**
oil**
oil**
oil**
14:0
Myristic
8.4
2.6
1.4
0.5
4.2
<0.1
0.1
0.1
<0.1
16:0
Palmitic
21.3
7.4
24.1
20.4
16.2
9.9
6.3
10.1
11.4
16:1
Palmitoleic
1.1
1.9
3.5
7.6
11.6
0.1
0.1
<0.1
0.1
18:0
Stearic
8.9
24.2
12.2
4.4
2.4
2.1
3.8
1.4
2.4
18:1n-9
Oleic
18.8
13.8
42.8
37.6
10.9
25.6
20.9
20.4
65.5
18:2n-6
Linoleic
1.0
3.9
11.7
12.3
1.2
53.1
62.3
51.8
10.4
18:3n-3
Alpha-linolenic
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.5
1.2
1.0
0.1
7.3
0.5
18:3n-6
Gamma-linolenic
0.2
<0.1
0.1
0.2
0.4
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
20:4n-6
Arachidonic
0.7
0.6
0.1
0.2
0.4
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
20:5n-3
Eicosapentaenoic
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
14.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
22:6n-3
Docosahexaenoic
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
11.9
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
*All values are expressed as g/100 g.
**Adapted from Hyvonen L, Lampi AM, Varo P, et al. Fatty acid analysis, TAG equivalents as net fat value, and nutritional attributes of 
commercial fats and oils. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 1993; 6: 24-40.
***Unpublished data, generally in agreement with published standards (Handbook 8, USDA, Washington, DC).
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 102 ---
Addition of fish oil to cat foods reduced cartilage degradation
and supported mobility. Geriatric cats (older than 12 years of
age) fed foods supplemented with fish oil had reduced bio-
markers of cartilage damage and enhanced mobility compared
to cats fed food without fish oil.
Fat-Soluble Vitamin Absorption
Dogs and cats have a “requirement” for lipid to enhance absorp-
tion of the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K. Dietary fat pro-
vides a physical environment in the gut that enhances absorp-
tion of fat-soluble vitamins. This requirement is in the range of
1 to 2% of the food and is not specific for any type of fat.
Lipid Requirements
Although not required for health,calories supplied by fat can be
more beneficial than those provided by carbohydrate or protein.
In cases of high-energy demand, the energy concentration of
the food can limit total caloric intake. When the total bulk of
the food is a limiting factor, increasing dietary fat allows for
increased energy consumption. Increased aerobic capacity dur-
ing exercise is supported by increased fat consumption because
of the enhanced use of fat calories when compared with calo-
ries from carbohydrate (Chapter 18).
Lipid Deficiency
Deficiencies of fatty acids impair wound healing, cause a dry
lusterless coat and scaly skin and change the lipid film on the
skin, which may predispose the animal to pyoderma (Chapter
32). If deficiency persists, alopecia, edema and moist dermatitis
may develop. Lesions of moist dermatitis, associated with EFA
deficiency, are most common in the external ear canals and
between the toes. However, lesions may develop anywhere on
the body. Emaciation can result from severe, persistent EFA
deficiency. An EFA deficiency can also impair reproductive
performance (i.e., neonatal abnormalities and death may result
if pregnancy occurs).
Lipid Excess
Increased dietary lipid is often associated with increased ener-
gy intake, because increasing the dietary lipid content of a
food is nearly always associated with an increase in the food’s
caloric density. This relationship results from increased avail-
able energy. Changes in body composition result from
changes in energy balance. Energy intake may be influenced
by dietary fat; however, energy balance controls adiposity not
the lipid intake.
Increasing the fat concentration of foods generally enhances
palatability for dogs and cats. Fatty acid composition is an
important aspect of palatability and influences acceptance
through flavor and mouth feel. Dietary fat also influences sub-
sequent food selection (Mullen and Martin, 1990), an effect
mediated through serotonin, a neurotransmitter involved in
control of food intake (Mullen and Martin, 1992).
Interactions with Other Nutrients
High dietary fat concentration requires increased antioxidant
protection, such as added vitamin E. In the absence of adequate
antioxidants, dietary lipids will become rancid (Chapter 8).
Rancidity adversely affects the animal through reduced palata-
bility, reduced vitamin activity and possibly subsequent oxida-
tion of body fat. Because polyunsaturated omega-3 fatty acids
are more susceptible to peroxidation than are most omega-6
fatty acids, increased amounts of antioxidants are needed in
foods high in omega-3 fatty acids.
Excessive dietary unsaturated fat in conjunction with inade-
quate antioxidants may result in pansteatitis or “yellow fat dis-
ease.”The end products of rancidification in adipose tissue cause
a yellow, brown or orange discoloration of body fat. Affected
animals are anorectic, depressed, febrile and lethargic. They
move stiffly and generally show signs of cutaneous pain upon
handling as the result of inflamed subcutaneous fat. Treatment
involves dietary correction and oral vitamin E administration
until clinical signs disappear (Cordy, 1954; Collins, 1983).
103
Macronutrients
Figure 5-20. Lipoprotein metabolism. See text for details. Key: LDL = low-density lipoprotein, HDL = high-density lipoprotein, VLDL = very
low-density lipoprotein, LCAT = lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 103 ---
Lipid Sources
An array of animal and vegetable fats and oils in many combi-
nations are currently used in commercial pet food production.
Consumption of a specific fat results in a specific fatty acid pro-
file that influences subsequent storage and metabolism. Because
fatty acid intake strongly influences what type of fat is stored and
which end products of fatty acid metabolism will occur,“you are
what you eat” applies to fat more than any other macronutrient.
Table 5-21 shows the fatty acid compositions of different fat
sources. Fatty acid composition of dietary fat within a single
source varies for a number of reasons; therefore, the information
in Table 5-21 should be considered indicative of the fatty acid
profiles possible within these specific types of fats and oils.
Fatty acid profiles in body fat change because of changes in
fat consumption. For example, pigs consuming soybean oil had
a 70% increase in linoleic (18:2n6) acid in depot lipid when
compared with pigs fed diets containing tallow (Leszczynski et
al, 1992). An equally large change in fatty acid composition can
be found in plants due to changes in varieties within a species.
An extreme example of this is safflower oil, which can vary
from approximately 80% linoleic (18:2n6) to approximately
80% oleic (18:1n9), acid depending on the individual variety.
Fish oils have recently garnered the attention of nutritionists
and veterinarians for their positive effects in managing a variety
of disease processes. The oils most commonly associated with
fish are those of the omega-3 and omega-6 families. The pri-
mary fish oil supplement is derived from menhaden and is very
high in the omega-3/omega-6 families, compared with animal
fat.The omega-3 family usually predominates over the omega-
6 family in fish and shellfish, whereas polyunsaturated fatty
acids from vegetable sources are usually higher in the omega-6
family. Threefold differences in fatty acid composition may
occur in fish depending on season and geographic locale of the
catch. Fish oil composition depends on dietary intake, type of
fish (carnivore vs. plankton eater), warm vs. fresh water and sea-
son of catch. Unfortunately, data about specific variations based
on the above factors are unavailable (Stansby et al, 1990).
REFERENCES
The References for Chapter 5 can be found at
www.markmorris.org.
Small Animal Clinical Nutrition
104
CASE 5-1
Soft Feces in a Young Giant Schnauzer
Patient Assessment
A 10-month-old giant schnauzer weighing 44 kg was examined for persistently soft, mushy feces. An extensive diagnostic evalua-
tion, including multiple fecal cultures, did not reveal a cause for the poor stool quality. The dog’s body condition score was 3/5.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
The owners had been feeding the dog a homemade food recommended by the breeder who sold them the dog. The food consist-
ed of unspecified quantities of raw meat, liver, eggs, cooked brown rice, a few vegetables and approximately 100 g of various sup-
plements.
The food was changed to a highly digestible commercial veterinary therapeutic food (Prescription Diet i/d Caninea). The dog
was fed a mixture of moist and dry food that provided approximately 1,440 kcal (6.02 MJ) per day.
Feeding Plan
The dog’s stool quality improved somewhat with the change from the homemade food to the veterinary therapeutic food, but its
feces were still not formed. The owners continued to feed the dry form of the veterinary therapeutic food supplemented with a
high-fiber cereal (Post All Branb cereal [33% fiber]) to yield approximately a 10% fiber intake. (See Pearson square calculations in
Chapter 1.) The final feeding recommendation was one cup of the cereal with 2.5 cups of dry Prescription Diet i/d Canine.
Two weeks later, the owner reported the dog’s feces were normal. The food was subsequently changed to a veterinary therapeutic
food that contained moderate levels of dietary fiber (Prescription Diet w/d Caninea).
Endnotes
a. Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS, USA.
b. Kraft Foods, Inc., Rye Brook, NY, USA.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 104 ---
105
Macronutrients
CASE 5-2
Lethargy and Weight Loss in a Mixed-Breed Dog
Patient Assessment
A five-year-old male dog of mixed breeding was admitted for lethargy, a dull coat and weight loss.The dog weighed 8 kg. Physical
examination was normal except for a lusterless coat and a subnormal body condition score (2/5). Hypoproteinemia (total protein
4.1 g/dl, normal 5.0 to 7.5 g/dl) and hypoalbuminemia (albumin 1.2 g/dl, normal 2.2 to 3.5 g/dl) were noted on the serum bio-
chemistry profile. The dog had several struvite urocystoliths surgically removed two years earlier.
Assess the Food and Feeding Method
For the past two years, the dog had been fed a veterinary therapeutic food (Prescription Diet s/d Caninea) that contained reduced
levels of protein (7.9% dry matter), calcium, phosphorus and magnesium, and resulted in production of acidic urine. These nutri-
tional characteristics have been shown to help dissolve struvite urocystoliths (Chapter 43).The dog had been fed one can (620 kcal
[2.6 MJ]) daily.
Because of the low-protein content and other nutritional characteristics of this food, it is not recommended for long-term main-
tenance of adult dogs. The manufacturer recommends that Prescription Diet s/d Canine be fed for no more than six months.
Because no other causes of hypoproteinemia and hypoalbuminemia were found, protein malnutrition was tentatively diagnosed.
Feeding Plan
The dog’s food was changed to a different veterinary therapeutic food (Prescription Diet c/d Caninea).This food contains reduced
levels of struvite precursor substances and produces an acidic urinary pH; however, it has a higher protein content (23.6% dry mat-
ter).This food is also nutritionally adequate for long-term maintenance of adult dogs.The dog was fed 1.5 cans (700 kcal [2.9 MJ])
daily until it reached optimal body condition.
Endnote
a. Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS, USA.
VetBooks.ir


--- PAGE 105 ---
MINERALS
Introduction
Definition
The term “mineral” is generally used to denote all inorganic ele-
ments in a food. These inorganic elements constitute the
majority of ash that remains after combustion of all organic
matter. Ash analysis is of little value either for expressing min-
eral requirements or for indicating the useful mineral content of
foods for two basic reasons: 1) body requirements are specific
for certain inorganic elements (e.g., calcium, zinc, etc.) and 2)
ash may not be a measure of total inorganic matter present,
because some organic carbon may be bound as carbonate, and
some inorganic elements (e.g., sulfur, selenium, iodine, fluorine
and even sodium) may be lost during combustion.
The most important reason to determine total ash is to calcu-
late the nitrogen-free extract by difference, as is required in the
proximate analysis of foodstuffs.Specific minerals of interest can
then be assayed (if not volatilized) from the ash component.
More than 18 mineral elements are believed to be essential
for mammals (McDowell, 1992). By definition, macrominerals
are required by the animal in the diet in percentage amounts,
whereas microminerals or “trace” minerals are required at the
mg/kg or parts per million (ppm). There are seven macromin-
erals: calcium, phosphorus, sodium, magnesium, potassium,
chloride and sulfur. There are at least 11 trace elements or
micronutrient minerals: iron, zinc, copper, iodine, selenium,
manganese, cobalt, molybdenum, fluorine, boron and chromi-
um.The last six are assumed to be essential for dogs and cats by
analogy with other species. Calcium, phosphorus, magnesium,
potassium, sodium and chloride are discussed below. Neither
the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)
nor the National Research Council (NRC) lists a sulfur
requirement for dogs or cats (AAFCO, 2007; NRC, 2006).
Generally, there isn’t a dietary need for sulfur per se, if a food is
formulated to meet the sulfur-containing amino acid require-
ments of animals with simple stomachs.
Of the microminerals, only iron, zinc, copper, manganese,
iodine and selenium will be discussed here. These trace miner-
als have been deemed essential for dogs and cats (although clin-
ical cases of manganese deficiency have never been reported to
occur in dogs or cats) (AAFCO, 2007). Cobalt and molybde-
num are clearly important minerals in ruminant nutrition, but
are not considered essential in monogastric species.
Information about chromium and boron, two ultra-trace min-
erals, is included because of the potential importance these
nutrients may have in companion animal nutrition. Other new
trace elements discovered since 1970 include arsenic, lead, lithi-
um, nickel, silicon, tin and vanadium. The essentiality of these
minerals has not been elucidated in all species and under prac-
tical conditions may not be essential in the diet.
Function
Minerals are fundamental as: 1) structural components of body
organs and tissues, such as calcium, phosphorus and magne-
Chapter
6
Micronutrients:
Minerals and Vitamins
相关研究者 
Shiguang Yu 
Lauren Kats
Inke Paetau-Robinson
Christopher S. Cowell
“Maybe my variety is due to bad absorption of vitamins.”
Stephen Hawking
VetBooks.ir


